Disputes 
Edition: 02  I  Date: 20-09-24  I  A Smart Freight Centre initiative 

1.  Introduction 

1.1. This  procedure  covers  disputes  that  may  arise  from  the  Smart  Freight  Centre  (SFC) 
Conformity Assessment Scheme (CAS), as defined in the key scheme documents: ER Manual 
- ISO 14083 (ASU-PRO-001-2) ER Manual – MBM Specification (ASU-PRO-007-2),  VVB 
Manual – ISO 14083 (ASU-PRO-002-2) and VVB Manual – MBM Specification (ASU-PRO-
008-2). 

1.2. This procedure becomes effective on the date of issue indicated above. 

2.  Scope and applicability 

2.1. ”Disputes” are both appeals and complaints.  

2.2. “Appeal”  means  a  request  made  by  a  Validation  and  Verification  Body  (VVB)  to  SFC  for 

reconsideration of an adverse approval decision which it has made. 

2.3. “Complaint”,  means  expression  of  dissatisfaction,  other  than  an  appeal,  by  any  person  or 

organization, relating to the activities related to  a) the SFC CAS, or of b) an Approved VVB. 

2.4. For the purpose of this procedure, an appeal must be made by a VVB and be directly related 
to an adverse approval decision. All other expressions of dissatisfaction will be regarded as 
complaints. 

3.  Appeals 

3.1. A VVB, whether applicant, approved, suspended or withdrawn, has the right to appeal to SFC 
to  reconsider  an  adverse  approval  decision  by  SFC,  which  relates  to  its  desired  approval 
status. 

3.2. Appeals shall be submitted in writing, in English, by email to: 

assurance@smartfreightcentre.org,  within  30  days  of  the  date  of  written  notification  of  the 
adverse approval decision. Any supporting documentation which the appellant wishes SFC to 
consider must be submitted together with the appeal. 

ASU-PRO-005-2 V02 Disputes 

Editor: Assurance Manager 

     Page 1 of 4 

                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disputes 

[Title] 

Edition 02 

20.09.24  

3.3. Any adverse approval decision that is the subject of an appeal shall remain in force during the 

appeal process. 

3.4. On receipt of an appeal, SFC shall carry out an initial review of the nature of the issue and the 
reasons being cited for the appeal, and inform the appellant of the outcome of the initial review 
within five working (business) days:   

3.4.1.  If the issue is considered to fall within the definition of an appeal, SFC will inform the 

VVB that the appeal has been accepted for investigation. 

3.4.2.  If the issue is not considered to fall within the definition of an appeal, the appellant 
will be notified as to why, and given the option to pursue their concerns following the 
SFC complaint process. The decision on whether to accept an appeal is final.  

3.5. If  the  appeal  is  accepted  for  investigation,  SFC  shall  appoint  as  the  appeals  investigator  a 
senior manager who has not been involved in the decision-making process in question. 

3.6. The investigator shall consider the grounds for the appeal and the evidence provided and may 
convene a hearing at which both the appellant and SFC decision maker present their case, in 
person or remotely. The appellant has the right to request a hearing to be held, even if the 
investigator  does  not  consider  it  necessary.  The  appellant  may  also  decline  to  attend  the 
hearing, if one is convened.  

3.7. The investigator shall make a recommendation to the SFC CEO, within 10 (working) days of 

the appeal having been accepted. 

3.8. The SFC CEO shall make the final decision within five working (business) days of receipt of 

the recommendation from the investigator.  

3.9. The appellant shall be informed in writing of the outcome within 30 days of the appeal having 
been received, as well as the grounds on which the appeal decision is based on. At this time, 
the  appellant  shall  receive  a  copy  of  the  conclusions  and  recommendations  from  the 
investigator. 

3.10.  If the appeal is upheld, SFC will take appropriate corrective action and change the decision. 

If the appeal is not upheld, SFC will not accept a future appeal on the same grounds.   

4.  Complaints about a VVB that has been approved by SFC 

4.1. Complaints about a VVB that has been approved by SFC must be submitted to the VVB first. 
The VVB shall be given the opportunity to investigate and respond to the complaint before it 
is escalated. If the complainant is not satisfied with the VVB’s response, it shall then escalate 
it to their National Accreditation Body, which shall be given the opportunity to investigate and 
respond to the complaint before it is escalated to SFC.  

ASU-PRO-005-2 V02 Disputes 

Editor: Assurance Manager 

     Page 2 of 4 

                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disputes 

[Title] 

Edition 02 

20.09.24  

4.2. Only complaints that are about a GHG verification service carried out as part of SFC CAS are 
covered by this procedure. The focus of the SFC complaints process is on the performance 
and  decision-making  of  SFC  or  of  VVBs  approved  by  SFC,  for  conformity  with  applicable 
procedures and SFC CAS requirements. It is not within SFC´s remit to issue or change a GHG 
verification opinion/ statement. Complaints regarding financial and contractual matters also fall 
outside the remit of this procedure. 

4.3. SFC  has  contractual  arrangements  in  place  with  all  approved  VVBs  to  protect  information 
obtained or created during the approval process (License Agreement SFC-VVB, ASU-TPL-
008-2).  Therefore,  SFC  cannot  disclose  confidential  information  about  approved  VVBs  to 
complainants, and there is a limit to what can be shared with complainants. Consequently, for 
complaints about an approved VVB there will be a limit as to the amount of information that 
can be shared with complainants in relation to the SFC investigation. 

5.  Complaints about SFC 

5.1. Complaints  about  SFC  that  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  procedure  are  about  activities  and 

personnel that are part of the SFC CAS. 

6.  Complaints process 

6.1. Complaints 

shall 
assurance@smartfreightcentre.org.  

submitted 

be 

in  writing, 

in  English, 

by 

email 

to: 

6.2. Complaints shall include: 

6.2.1.  Description of the complaint and brief timeline of events 
6.2.2.  Copy of the complaint submitted to the approved VVB, and any response received, 

if applicable 

6.2.3.  Copy of any relevant supporting evidence. 

6.3. On receipt of a complaint, SFC shall: 1) (if applicable) inform the VVB that a complaint has 
been  received,  2) carry  out  an  initial  review  and  3)  inform  the  complainant  (and  the VVB  if 
applicable) of the outcome within one week. 

6.4. The complaint shall be rejected in the following cases: 

6.4.1.  The complaint is anonymous. 
6.4.2.  The issue does not fall within SFC´s remit as described above. 
6.4.3.  For  a  complaint  about  a  VVB,  the  VVB  has  not  been  given  the  opportunity  to 

investigate and respond to it. 

6.4.4.  The  complaint  about  a  VVB  is  submitted  more  than  one  month  after  the  date  of 
rejection or closure of the complaint by the VVB or the National Accreditation Body, of 
applicable.  

6.4.5.  The complaint about SFC is submitted more than one month after the issue occurred.  

ASU-PRO-005-2 V02 Disputes 

Editor: Assurance Manager 

     Page 3 of 4 

                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disputes 

[Title] 

6.4.6.  There  is  compelling  evidence  that  the  complaint  is  frivolous,  malicious,  trivial, 

vexatious, or generated to gain competitive advantage. 

Edition 02 

20.09.24  

6.5. If the complaint is accepted for investigation, SFC shall appoint as the complaint investigator 
someone  who is free of  conflict of interest. The  investigator can be any internal or external 
resource  that  has  the  technical  knowledge  or  competence  relevant  to  the  issue  being 
investigated. 

6.6. The complainant and other relevant parties may be interviewed or otherwise approached to 

provide evidence for the investigation. 

6.7. The  complainant  will be  informed  in  writing  of  the  outcome  within  60  days  of  the  complaint 
having been received. However, any conclusions will be provided within the constraints of the 
confidentiality requirements mentioned above. 

6.8. SFC reserves the right to invoice costs of investigating complaints about a VVB to the VVB, at 

the SFC daily rate indicated in the Assurance fees for VVBs (ASU-FEE-001-2). 

7.        Related policies and other information 

7.1. ER Manual - ISO 14083 (ASU-PRO-001-2) 
7.2. ER Manual - MBM Specification (ASU-PRO-007-2) 
7.3. VVB Manual - ISO 14083 (ASU-PRO-002-2) 
7.4. VVB Manual - MBM Specification(ASU-PRO-008-2) 
7.5. Licence Agreement SFC-VVB (ASU-TPL-008-2) 
7.6. Assurance fees for VVBs (ASU-FEE-001-2) 

Version history 

1  

06/09/2023 First edition  

2 

20/09/2024 Second edition. Consideration of the new CAS scope for the Market 
Based Measures Specification. Minor revisions for increased clarity. 

___________________________________________________________ 

© 2024 Smart Freight Centre (SFC) 

This work is copyright of SFC. It may be reproduced for fair use by those seeking SFC approval, or those wishing to learn more 
about the SFC CAS, but may not be used by others without the written permission of SFC. 

ASU-PRO-005-2 V02 Disputes 

Editor: Assurance Manager 

     Page 4 of 4 

                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
