Barriers for Carriers to adopt 
fuel-saving technologies and 
measures  
Mapping barriers relevant to road freight carriers 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Smart Freight Centre 2016. Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel saving technologies and measures – 
mapping barriers relevant to road freight carriers 

This  publication  may  be  reproduced  in  whole  or  in  part  in  any  form  for  educational  or  non-profit  purposes 
without special permission from the copyright holder, provided acknowledgment of the source is made. Smart 
Freight Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of any publication that uses State of Play: Green Freight in 
Asia  as  a  source.  No  use  of  this  publication  may  be  made for  resale  or  for  any  other  commercial  purpose 
whatsoever, without prior permission in writing from Smart Freight Centre. 

Disclaimer 
The  views  expressed  in  this  publication  are  those  of  Smart  Freight  Centre  and  staff,  consultants  and 
management, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Trustees of Smart Freight Centre. Smart 
Freight Centre does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and does not accept 
responsibility for consequence of their use. 

SFC Authors 
Sophie Punte, Executive Director 
Floor Bollee, Manager Communication 

SFC Team 
Boyong Wang, Director Strategic Relations 
Su Li, Office Manager and Project Coordinator SFC China 

About Smart Freight Centre 
Smart  Freight  Centre  (SFC)  is  a  global  non-profit  organization  leading  the  way  to  a  more  efficient  and 
environmentally  sustainable  global  freight  sector.  SFC  works  with  partners  and  existing  initiatives  to  help 
businesses gain competitive advance from smarter freight and catalyze sector-wide action.  

SFC focuses on three approaches: 
▪  Define and drive business leadership and collaboration between the private sector, government and civil 

society (Smart Freight Leadership) 

▪  Create and implement a universal and transparent way of calculating logistics emissions across the global 

supply chain through the Global Logistics Emissions Council (GLEC) 

▪  Catalyze  the  sector-wide  adoption  of  proven  and  cost-effective  technologies  and  solutions  starting  with 

road freight through SFC’s Smart Trucks Platform.  

Contact 
Smart Freight Centre 
Vijzelstraat  68-78,  1017  HL,  Amsterdam, Netherlands 
P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org 

Smart Freight Centre Beijing Office 
Room 817, ULO Park  
Wang Jing, Chaoyang district 
Beijing, China 
Tel office: +86 10 8476 6376 

 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

Contents 
1. Introduction .................................................................................................................................................... 2 

2. Barriers for carriers: an overview ................................................................................................................... 3 

3. External Barriers ............................................................................................................................................ 5 

3.1 Market Forces .......................................................................................................................................... 5 

3.2 Policies and Infrastructure ....................................................................................................................... 5 

3.3 Partners and Programs ............................................................................................................................ 6 

3.4 Technologies and Measures .................................................................................................................... 7 

4. Internal Barriers ............................................................................................................................................. 8 

4.1 Reactive Management ............................................................................................................................. 8 

4.2 Management Systems ............................................................................................................................. 9 

4.3 Finance .................................................................................................................................................. 10 

4.4 Awareness and Capacity ....................................................................................................................... 11 

References ...................................................................................................................................................... 12 

1. Introduction 

Road  freight  is  growing  exponentially,  especially  in  developing  countries.  Road  freight  is  also  inefficient, 
represents two-thirds of global freight CO2 emissions and a main contributor to local air pollution. Fuel costs 
money -- in many developing countries fuel bills are anywhere between 30 and 60% of operating costs. Driving 
empty trucks costs money – in countries like China and Thailand up to 40% of trucks are empty. Poor driving 
behavior costs money – the difference in fuel efficiency between the best and worst driver can be as high as 
25%. Carriers have a choice of ample technologies and measures to improve fuel efficiency and reduce costs 
and emissions at the same time. Then why are so many carriers not do the smart thing and adopt these? 

Smart Freight Centre (SFC) was established  in 2013 as a global non-profit organization to make the global 
freight sector more efficient and environmentally sustainable. One of SFC’s priorities is to remove barriers that 
prevent carriers from adopting fuel saving technologies and measures, especially those that are proven and 
market ready. 

Opportunities for more efficient trucking exist in every market around the world. The urgency to act is in fast 
growing  economies  where  freight  grows  most  rapidly  and  is  inefficient:  China,  India,  Brazil,  Mexico,  South 
Africa and several more. SFC first focused on mapping the current freight situation in Asia and in particular 
China and India. The “State of Play  – Green Freight in Asia” report (SFC, 2013) described the road freight 
sector, trucking developments, fuel and emissions, and touched on barriers and opportunities for green freight 
and technologies for trucks.  

Now  it  is  important  to  get  a  better  understanding  of  what  really  stops  carriers  from  investing  in  trucking 
efficiency. This paper aims to provide a framework of barriers based on existing barrier studies in the freight 
sector from around the world supplemented with SFC interviews with carriers and experience in working with 
Chinese carriers.  

It does not provide rock solid conclusions on barriers backed by statistics. We wanted to know enough for us 
to start confidently with the next phase: design and roll out a Smart Trucks Platform that works bottom-up to 
help carriers that want to lead moving forward.  We encourage all stakeholders to join our effort to help road 
freight  carriers  to  adopt  smart  freight  solutions:  cargo  owners,  truck  manufacturers,  technology  suppliers, 
industry  associations,  research  institutes,  governments,  NGOs,  foundations,  development  banks  and 
institutions. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

2. Barriers for carriers: an overview 

SFC developed a map of barriers for carriers to adopting fuel saving and emission reducing technologies and 
measures as shown in Figure 1. The identification of these barriers draws from SFC’s own work and other 
existing projects and studies (see references at the end of this report). 

A distinction  needs to be  made between  internal  and external  barriers. Internal barriers relate  to  obstacles 
within the company boundaries of a carrier and that are mostly within management’s control. There are four 
categories of internal barriers: decision-making, management systems, finance, and awareness and capacity.  

External barriers relate to outside factors and players over which a carrier has little or no influence. The four 
categories  of  external  barriers  are:  market  forces,  institutions  and  policies,  partners  and  programs,  and 
technologies and measures. 

Figure 1. Map of barriers to at scale adoption of fuel-saving technologies and measures by road 
freight carriers 

All these barriers are interconnected and often re-enforce each other. It is essential to understand relations 
between these barriers to get a holistic understanding of why carriers fail to adopt fuel-saving technologies 
and measures at scale. The most relevant connections are shown in Figure 2. 

The road freight sector is first and foremost a commercial sector driven by market forces. It is therefore not 
surprising that the root cause of barriers identified lies in the freight market itself: an oversupply of carriers and 
trucks combined with high fragmentation leads to a cut-throat competitive market that puts carriers under an 
enormous pressure to survive. This in turn heavily influences a business decision making, the ability of carriers 
to finance technologies and measures and invest in management systems and internal capacity building. The 
other external barriers further weaken carriers’ ability to become more fuel efficient. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

Figure 2. Most relevant relationships between barriers for carriers  

It is important to focus on what barriers can be realistically addressed,  in a concerted effort that looks at all 
identified barriers holistically, while involving carriers, their immediate partner and broader stakeholders.  

First, while it is tempting to focus on market forces, this is not realistic. A better approach is to focus on barriers 
that carriers have more control over, such as management systems or awareness and capacity, or that partner 
NGOs and government agencies can address, such as policies, infrastructure and programs.  

Second, addressing one barriers is not going to solve the problem. For example, without clear policies and 
technology standards, carriers don’t have the guarantee that technologies meet minimum requirements, which 
in turn undermines their trust in technologies available on the market – so carriers won’t invest. Unfortunately, 
technology standards alone will not be enough. Fleet managers need to be aware of what technologies are 
available and have the capacity to assess which technologies and suppliers are the best fit, otherwise they 
cannot  convince  management  to  invest  in  these.  Even  if  fleet  managers  are  capable,  without  good 
management systems they cannot get reliable data to build a business case that management will want to 
see. Even if these three barriers are overcome and management wants to purchase fuel-saving technologies, 
many are unable to come up with funds because of cash flow challenges.  

Third, addressing barriers holistically also means that active collaboration is needed.  For example, a green 
freight program can provide information on technologies and measures but will be more effective if backed by 
government and NGOs. Technology providers, industry associations, and academic institutions can  provide 
fleet  managers  training,  but  this  will  be  more  effective  if  successful  fleet  managers  are  involved  in  training 
delivery.  

In the next sections, the eight categories and individual barriers are described in more detail.  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

3. External Barriers 

3.1 Market Forces 

In the context of the freight sector, market forces relate to the economic factors affecting the price of, demand 
for, and availability  of freight services. Demand by  end-consumers drives the  need for freight services and 
trickles down to carriers via shippers (i.e. companies selling goods), retailers, and intermediates like logistics 
service providers and freight forwarders.  

As shown in Figure 3, main barriers caused by market forces are that cargo-owners focus primarily on driving 
costs of freight down in a fragmented and over-saturated market, the economy and fuel price are volatile and 
suppliers focus more on sales than on what is best for carriers. As a consequence, carriers hesitate to make 
long-term investments, lack trust in their suppliers and customers, and/or are given the wrong advice about 
fuel-saving technologies and measures.   

Market forces are very difficult to influence because it is entrenched in the wider economy and society, and 
transcends  the  freight  and  logistics  sector. While  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  address  these  specific  barriers, 
efforts can be made to soften the consequences that lead to reduced uptake of technologies and measures. 
Given that barriers related to market forces are so fundamental to carriers taking action, these barriers must 
always be kept in mind when designing solutions related to other barrier categories. 

Figure 3. Market force barriers and consequences for road freight carriers 

3.2 Policies and Infrastructure 

The “policies and infrastructure” barrier relates to the overarching institutional and policy framework, which lies 
at  the  base  of  the  broader  role  of  government  covering  planning,  infrastructure,  legislation,  regulation, 
standards; financing and other incentives; and strategic support specific. Government agencies and affiliated 
organizations at the national, provincial and local levels all have a role to play in policies that affect carriers. 

Main barriers shown in Figure 4 are institutional and policy gaps and overlaps, limited policy enforcement and 
funding allocation towards policy and infrastructure implementation, and limited supportive infrastructure. As a 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

consequence,  carriers  are  faced  with  mixed  policy  messages  coming  from  government  and  are  less 
incentivized  to  comply  with  regulations.  Moreover,  a  minimum  quality  of  technologies  on  the  market  is  not 
always guaranteed and carriers miss clear guidance on technologies and measures they consider adopting. 
Lacking supportive  infrastructure, such as intermodal connections or charging points for electric trucks, will 
delay investments by carriers.  

Policy  and  infrastructure  barriers  can  be  addressed  but  only  under  certain  conditions.  First,  government 
agencies must support changes and work closely with industry and other stakeholders to ensure feasibility on 
the  ground.  Second,  success  is  only  achieved  if  the  institutional,  policy  and  implementation  barriers  are 
addressed in parallel, which is complex. Third, change needs to be followed through from the national to the 
provincial and local levels, which is a challenge also faced with other policies and plans. 

Figure 4. Policies and infrastructure barriers and consequences for road freight carriers 

3.3 Partners and Programs 

Carriers need many partners to help them adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures: industry associations, 
OEMs, technology and service providers, customers and subcontractors, NGOs, research/academic institutes, 
and governments. In this context of this study, “programs” relate to organized programs, platforms and projects 
with a direct or indirect impact on carriers. These can range from broad climate or energy programs with freight 
as one of many sectors, to green freight programs or platforms that specifically focus on improving efficiency 
and reducing emissions from freight, to pilot projects to test specific technologies or measures.  

As shown in Figure 5, carriers, especially smaller ones, often don’t have access to a wide range of technology 
suppliers and service providers. They could look for help, but miss neutral and trusted organizations they can 
contact  or  programs  they  can  join.  As  a  result,  carriers  struggle  to  find  the  right  solutions  or  trustworthy 
information about these. Plus, program support is missing to improve fuel efficiency and find peers and partners 
to work with.    

The right programs and partners can have a game-changing effect on not only addressing direct barriers but 
can also trigger change for ALL other internal and external barriers for carriers (see Figure 2 earlier). For this 
to work it is essential that neutral/trusted organizations and partners are selected carefully and programs are 
designed to meet the needs of carriers and with all barriers types in mind. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

Figure 5. Partners and programs barriers and consequences for road freight carriers 

3.4 Technologies and Measures 

Figure 6. Technologies and measures relevant to road freight carriers 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

To significantly reduce emissions from freight, a mix of solutions is needed covering solutions for vehicles and 
fuels, fleet movement and the transport system. Solutions relevant to road freight are listed in Figure 6. It is 
acknowledged  that  carriers  do  not  have  an  equal  say  in  all  technologies  and  measures  that  carriers.  For 
example, a carrier can more easily adopt aerodynamics devices than restructure supply chains. In efforts to 
help carriers directly to address barriers, greater attention is needed for technologies and measures that they 
can decide on themselves. 

Figure  7  shows  that  main  barriers  relate  to  the  availability,  market  readiness,  quality  and  reliability  of 
technologies and measures, in combination with suppliers overstating benefits of adopting these. This poses 
the risk that carriers do not trust technologies recommended by suppliers, focus on wrong technologies and 
measures, and are discouraged because of disappointing results. 

It  is  noted  that  all  these  consequences  relate  to  decision-making  especially  of  carrier  management,  and 
therefore it is critical that something is done about this. These technologies and measures barriers can be best 
addressed by sound policies, institutional frameworks and supporting programs, all of which should involve a 
mix of government, private sector and civil society partners.  

Figure 7. Technologies and measures barriers and consequences for road freight carriers 

4. Internal Barriers 

4.1 Reactive Management 

Reactive management in this study relate to reactive decision-making made by carriers, in particular senior 
management and middle management, including fleet managers. This covers a wide range of decisions that 
can  have  a  direct  or  indirect  relation  to  fuel  efficiency  and  emissions.  Examples  are  budgeting,  selecting 
contractors, purchasing equipment, and staff training and development. 

As shown in Figure 8, the main barrier is a short-term thinking mentality of carriers and businesses in general, 
which amplifies entrenched decision-making based on hierarchy and relations and the tendency to maximize 
subcontracting. This leads to carriers prioritizing costs and ignoring fuel efficiency when purchasing equipment 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

and  selecting  contractors.  Furthermore,  carriers  have  limited  influence  on  subcontractors’  decisions  and 
operational practices relevant to fuel efficiency, and thus the technologies and measures they adopt.  

Reactive management is the most significant internal barrier, yet very difficult to overcome because it requires 
a change in behavior. Equally important is that the root cause of current management practices and decisions 
lies in market pressures that reinforces short-term thinking. More practical may be an indirect approach that 
focuses  on  other  barriers,  such  as  management  systems,  awareness  and  capacity  and  technologies  and 
measures. 

Figure 8. Reactive management barriers and consequences for road freight carriers 

4.2 Management Systems 

Management  systems  cover  all  policies,  processes  and  procedures  that  carriers  need  to  ensure  that  the 
organization and its operations run smoothly. Management systems are important to various aspects of fuel 
efficiency, such as data, trucks maintenance, equipment (e.g. tires), fuel, and drivers. 

Figure 9 shows that most carriers resist change which contributes to underdeveloped fleet management (and 
broader management) systems. Related to underdeveloped systems is that data are often not available and 
reliable, or are not used within the organization. Carriers are therefore less open to consider, and less proactive 
and able to identify opportunities fuel efficiency and track results. 

Management systems are important because they affect other internal barriers by informing decisions, tracking 
finances,  and  increasing  the  awareness  and  capacity  of  management  and  staff.  In  addition,  carriers  can 
improve  management  systems  largely  by  themselves,  build  on  what  already  exists,  and  quickly  generate 
results  that  justify  their  further  development.  Developing  management  systems  thus  provides  an  outright 
opportunity to catalyze change within carriers that leads to greater adoption of fuel-saving technologies and 
measures. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

Figure 9. Management system barriers and consequences for road freight carriers 

4.3 Finance 

In this study, finance relates to the overall financial health of a carrier thus covering reserves, cash flow, debts, 
credit ratings and other financial factors. A carrier’s financial situation is heavily influenced by market forces 
and management strategy and decision-making.   

Figure 10. Finance barriers and consequences for road freight carriers 

Figure 10 shows that carriers find themselves in a vicious cycle of poor financial health: carriers have poor 
credit ratings and are unable to solve this because of continuous low reserves and cash flow challenges as 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

they try to stay afloat. They are also uncertain about return on investments of technologies, which is linked to 
technology quality and reliability. Carriers thus lack funding, hesitate or delay investing, and resort to buying 
the cheapest equipment. Faced with slim margins, the slightest mistake can threaten a carriers’ survival. 

Management is responsible for the financial health of the organization and it is therefore not desirable, if at all 
possible, to influence this. However, opportunities do exist to help carriers overcome the investment barrier of 
specific fuel-saving technologies and measures. For  example, technology suppliers could offer carriers “try 
before  you  pay” options or allow  them to pay  in installments. Programs and trusted partners could provide 
cost-benefit  information  for  technologies  and  measures  to  increase  carrier  confidence  to  invest,  ideally 
supported by actual cases from peer carriers. 

4.4 Awareness and Capacity 

In this study, awareness relates to the knowledge or perception of fuel efficiency by carrier management, fleet 
managers  and  drivers.  Capacity  on  the  other  hand  refers  to  the  skills  and  ability  to  improve  fuel  efficiency 
through,  for  example,  knowing  what  questions  to  ask  technology  suppliers,  building  a  business  case  to 
convince management to invest, or strengthening management systems to prove that fuel efficiency leads to 
cost reductions.  

Figure 11 shows that while carriers are aware that fuel is one of the largest operational costs, awareness of 
the  potential  of  to  improve  fuel  efficiency  is  generally  lacking,  especially  with  management.  Although  fleet 
managers are usually more aware, they lack capacity to improve fuel efficiency. Finally, drivers only care about 
fuel efficiency when it directly affects them financially, which is not helped by subcontracting practices of most 
carriers. As a result, management does not prioritize fuel efficiency, fleet managers are unequipped to improve 
fuel efficiency or convince  management of opportunities, and drivers don’t put efforts into fuel savings that 
benefit the carrier. 

“Give a man a fish and  you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish and  you feed him for a lifetime.” This  
proverb definitely applies to carriers – by raising awareness and increasing capacity, carriers can themselves 
identify and implement fuel saving solutions and thus take control of reducing fuel costs and emissions. The 
potential  to  improve  awareness  and  capacity  is  significant  and  should  thus  be  a  main  focus  of  especially 
programs and management systems.  

Figure 11. Awareness and capacity barriers and consequences for road freight carriers 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

Barriers for Carriers to adopt fuel-saving technologies and measures  

Beijing Transport, Energy and Environment Center (BTEC), 2015. “Survey Report on Green Tires of 
Operating Freight Vehicles in Beijing.” 

Clean Air Asia, 2013. “China Green Freight Policy and Institutional Analysis Report” 
http://cleanairasia.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/China-Green-Freight-Policy-and-Institutional-Analysis-
Report.pdf 

China Road Transport Association (CRTA), 2014. "China Green Freight Initiative Seminar (2014) - Exploring 
Green Freight Development in the Process of Reform." 

Smart Freight Centre (SFC), 2013. “State of Play – Green Freight in Asia”. 
http://www.smartfreightcentre.org/main/info/publications 

International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT), North American Council for Fuel Efficiency (NACFE), 
Cascade Sierra Solutions (CSS), 2013. “Barriers to the Increased Adoption of Fuel Efficiency Technologies 
in the North American On-Road Freight Sector” http://www.theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications/ICCT-
NACFE-CSS_Barriers_Report_Final_20130722.pdf  

International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT), CE Delft, 2012. “Market Barriers to Increased 
Efficiency in the European On-road Freight Sector.” 
http://www.theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications/CE_Delft_4780_Market_Barriers_Increased_Efficiency_
European_Onroad_Freight_Sector_def-2.pdf 

Yueng-Hsiang Huang,Pei-Luen Patrick Rau,Bin Zhang,Matthias Roetting, 2008. “ truck drivers’ attitudes 
toward feedback by technology: A quantitative approach", Accident Analysis & Prevention 

Yong Zhang, Russell G. Thompson, Xiangtai Bao, Yunjian Jiang, 2014. “Analyzing the Promoting Factors for 
Adopting Green Logistics Practices: A Case Study of Road Freight Industry in Nanjing, China", Procedia - 
Social and Behavioral Sciences 

Hong,  Junjie  &  Liu,  Binglian,  2007.  "Logistics  development 
Transportation Journal  

in  China:  a  provider  perspective", 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OMSLAG FOTO 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
