Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

B O O S T L O G   P R O J E C T  

D E L I V E R A B L E   R E P O R T  

Document identifier: 

BOOSTLOG – D2.10 

Due Date of Delivery to EC 

30. 09. 2023 

Actual Date of Delivery to EC 

27.10.2023 

Title: 

Dissemination level: 

Work package: 

Lead Beneficiary: 

Other Beneficiaries: 

Document status: 

report 

Cloud 
and 
implementing  Efficient  and  Zero-Emission 
Freight Transport  

VII:  Monitoring 

PU 

WP2 

ALICE 

SFC, CLOSER 

Final 

Document link: 

https://www.etp-logistics.eu/boostlog/ 

Disclaimer  

This report is part of the BOOSTLOG project that has received funding by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement 101006902. The content of this report reflects 
only the authors’ view. European Climate, Infrastructure and Environment Executive Agency (CINEA) and the 
European Commission are not responsible for any use that may be made of the information it contains. 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

The BOOSTLOG project consortium consists of: 

Part. No  

Participant organisation name (short name) 

Country 

1 
(Coordinator) 

Alliance for Logistics Innovation through Collaboration in Europe, 
ALICE AISBL (ALICE) 

BE 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

STICHTING SMART FREIGHT CENTRE (SFC) 

FUNDACION ZARAGOZA LOGISTICS CENTER (ZLC) 

STICHTING TKI LOGISTIEK (TKI Dinalog) 

HACON INGENIEURGESELLSCHAFT MBH (HACON) 

NL 

ES 

NL 

BE 

INSTITUTE OF COMMUNICATION AND COMPUTER SYSTEMS (ICCS)  GR 

Vlaams Instituut voor de Logistiek VZW (VIL) 

FRAUNHOFER  GESELLSCHAFT 
ANGEWANDTEN FORSCHUNG E.V. (Fraunhofer) 

ZUR 

FOERDERUNG 

BE 

DER 

GE 

FIT Consulting SRL (FIT) 

FUNDACION  DE  LA  COMUNIDAD  VALENCIANA  PARA  LA 
INVESTIGACION,  PROMOCION  Y  ESTUDIOS  COMERCIALES  DE 
VALENCIAPORT (VPF) 

TECHNISCHE UNIVERSITEIT DELFT (TU Delft) 

EUROPEAN  ROAD  TRANSPORT  TELEMATICSIMPLEMENTATION 
COORDINATION  ORGANISATION  - 
INTELLIGENT  TRANSPORT 
SYSTEMS & SERVICES EUROPE (ERTICO ITS EUR) 

LINDHOLMEN SCIENCE PARK AKTIEBOLAG (LSP) 

IT 

ES 

NL 

BE 

SW 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Document History: 

Version 

Date 

Modification reason 

Author(s) 

1.0 

1.1 

1.3 

2.0 

11/09/2023  First version send to experts 

22/09/2023  Version send for review 

Stefanie Van Damme, Tharsis Teoh, 
Rodrigue Alfahel 

Stefanie Van Damme, Tharsis Teoh, 
Rodrigue Alfahel 

10/10/2023  Reviewed version 

Lori Tavasszy 

20/10/2023  Version ready for submission 

Stefanie Van Damme 

Final 

27/10/2023  Final 

Carolina Cipres and Yanying Li  

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Contents 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1 

THE BOOSTLOG PROJECT AND SCOPE OF THE DELIVERABLE 
1.1  The BOOSTLOG project 
1.2  Scope of this deliverable 
1.3  Methodology 

2  WHY EFFICIENT AND ZERO-EMISSION FREIGHT TRANSPORT 

3 

Introduction 

2.1 
2.2  What is emission monitoring and reporting? 
2.3  What is efficient freight transport? 
2.4  What is zero-emission freight transport? 
2.5  Expected positive impacts 
2.6  Barriers and guidelines 
ANALYSIS OF CURRENT MARKET PRACTICES AND TRENDS 
3.1  Overview 
3.2  Market practices: efficient freight transport 
3.3  Market practices: zero-emission freight transport 
3.4  Market practices: emission reporting 
PROJECTS TO IMPROVE EFFICIENT AND ZERO-EMISSION LOGISTICS 
4.1 
4.2  Overview on the selected projects 
4.3  Expected impacts of the selected projects 
4.4  Description of the selected projects 
IMPLEMENTATION CASES 
5.1  Overview on Outcomes and Implementation cases 
5.2 
5.3  Demonstrations and temporary implementations 
6 
POTENTIAL IMPLEMENTATION PATHS 
ANNEX I – SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEW GUIDE 

Implementation cases 

Identification and selection of relevant R&I projects 

5 

4 

5 

6 
6 
6 
8 
9 
9 
9 
12 
14 
17 
20 
23 
23 
23 
25 
34 
38 
38 
38 
41 
42 
49 
49 
50 
53 
53 
56 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  

In order to optimise European investments in R&I projects in the field of transport and logistics, BOOSTLOG 
carries out a thorough evaluation process of concluded Research and Innovation (R&I) projects financed with 
EU-funds. 

This evaluation is conducted from the perspective of different key domains of transport and logistics (T&L), 
(defined  by  BOOSTLOG  as  “Logistics  clouds”)  to  identify  R&I  gaps  in  T&L  and  prioritise  the  needs  to  be 
addressed  in  future  research  programmes,  thus  contributing  to  develop  an  innovation  ecosystem  for  the 
logistics sector that also contributes to the EU policy objectives. 

The present deliverable focuses on “Efficient and zero-emission freight transport”, showing the main results 
and impacts derived from European-funded projects on this area. The BOOSTLOG project maps more than 160 
EU-funded R&I projects, from the FP5 to H2020. This deliverable has selected 8 projects regarding ‘Efficient 
and zero-emission logistics’ and two projects focusing on the correct reporting of emissions related to T&L 
(Figure 1). 

Selected project discussed in this Cloud Report. All projects are finished, except H2Haul. 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

1  The BOOSTLOG project and scope of the deliverable 

1.1  The BOOSTLOG project 

Freight transport and logistics is facing critical challenges to address climate change, ensure supply chains are 
well functioning and people is served with required type of goods and services. In particular, cope with the 
expected  growth  of  freight  transportation  and  transition  to  zero  emission  logistics  up  to  2030  requires 
collaboration speeding up innovation.  

The  transport  sector  is  the  only sector  where  CO2 emissions  are  still  rising  (See  Section 2.1).  BOOSTLOG`s 
vision is transforming European freight transport and logistics R&I ecosystem to perform optimally by boosting 
impact generation out of R&I investment contributing to i) EU policy objectives towards climate neutrality, 
pollution, congestion and noise reduction, free movement of goods, internal security, digital transformation 
of logistics chains and data sharing logistics ecosystems and ii) Companies sustainability and competitiveness 
generating value for society.  

In  order  to  do  so,  BOOSTLOG  has  identified  4  main  areas  of  action:  i)  increase  visibility  and  support 
valorisation of R&I project Results, Outcomes and Implementation Cases in the freight transport and logistics 
field  ii)  develop  and  implement  valorisation  strategies  and  guidelines  to  speed  up  the  technological  and 
organisational  innovation  uptake,  including  the  creation  of  the  Innovation  Marketplace  and  issue 
recommendations to increase impact of R&I public funding, iii) Define high potential & priority R&I gaps to 
make  efficient  uses  of  R&I  investments  and  iv)  Strengthen  R&I  impacts  communication  and  Stakeholders 
engagement in the innovation process.  

In the framework of the first of those actions, BOOSTLOG has mapped and assessed more than 160 EU-funded 
R&I since FP5 in different freight transport and logistics domains (i.e., the Logistics Clouds), so as to develop 8 
comprehensive  and  industry  actionable  reports  (i.e.,  Cloud  reports).  6  cloud  reports  have  already  been 
published focusing on i) Coordination & collaboration ii) Urban logistics, iii) Logistics nodes, iv) Freight and 
logistics data sharing, v) Logistics network and, vi) Physical internet. This document is the 7th (vii) cloud report 
focusing  on  efficient  and  zero-emission  logistics/freight  transport.  The  last  cloud  report  (viii)  will  focus  on 
digitalisation.  These  reports  will  be  later  complemented  by  deliverables  on  valorisation  strategies  and 
guidelines for public R&I uptake (WP3), an innovation marketplace for R&I uptake (D3.3) and the identification 
of high-priority and potential R&I gaps that need to be prioritized in future R&I actions targeting policymakers 
(WP4).  

1.2  Scope of this deliverable  

The  scope  of  this  report  was  decided  by  the  task  coordinators,  consulted  by  the  BOOSTLOG  consortium. 
Defining the scope was mainly influenced by i) whether it lay within the scope of BOOSTLOG ii) how well the 
report complements the other 7 cloud reports iii) the availability of relevant R&I projects to be covered with 
this topic and, (iv) the time and resources available to conduct the report. Based on these factors, additional 
demarcation was made.  

This cloud report will complement the other 7 cloud reports by focusing on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
in  freight  transport.  This  includes  i)  monitoring  and  reporting  on  GHG  emissions  in  freight  transport  ii) 
developing and implementing efficient solutions for freight transport, that directly or indirectly decrease 
GHG emissions and, iii) developing and implementing zero-emission freight transport solutions.  

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Monitoring and reporting on GHG emissions in freight transport 

The  report  will  cover  a  broad  perspective  including  the  full  life  cycle,  i.e.,  GHG  emissions  related  to  the 
production  of  vehicles  and  energy,  and  to  tailpipe  GHG  emissions.  Several  freight  transport  modes  are 
included, enabling a comparison between different transport modes.   

Developing and implementing energy efficient solutions for freight transport 

The report will cover efficient solutions related to trucks categorised in EU as vehicle types N2 and N3, i.e., 
trucks  that  are  3.5  tonnes  or  heavier.  Lighter  trucks  (N1)  are  covered  in  the  cloud  report  Urban  Logistics. 
Refused trucks are also excluded, since their operation is very different from heavy-duty road trucks. Other 
transport modes are not covered in this report CCAM projects are not covered in this report since they will be 
included in the cloud report on Digitalisation. Other projects that are within scope are those focusing on the 
improvement affecting the overall energy efficiency of the truck and/or the freight transport system, excluding 
those that only focus on one element such as tyres. Solutions focusing on human behaviour such as eco-driving 
are also included.  

Developing and implementing zero-emission freight transport solutions 

The project defines zero-emission vehicles as vehicles with zero tailpipe emissions, not taking into account 
emissions from production or the emission to produce the energy source used as fuel. These emissions will 
however be taken into account in projects with the main focus on emissions reporting.  The report includes 
the  development  and  implementation  of  electric  and  hydrogen  heavy-duty  trucks  and  the  supporting 
infrastructure. Hybrid drive line technologies for heavy-duty trucks will not be part of the scope, although the 
report  will  acknowledge  some  of  the  projects  covering  this  topic.  Biofuels  or  Renewable  Fuels  from  Non-
Biological Origin (RFNBO), with the exception of hydrogen, will not be assessed in this report as the technology 
to use these fuels in internal combustion engines (ICE) is available and no impact on the logistic operation is 
expected. Figure 2 below summarizes what will be in scope and what is out of scope in this report. 

Scope  definition  for  Cloud  Report  VII  “Monitoring  and  implementing  efficient  and  zero-
emission freight transport”. 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       7 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

1.3  Methodology 

These cloud reports include a brief highlight of the main Challenges, past and current specific pain points in a 
given  Cloud,  key  R&I  results,  that  have  resulted  in  Outcomes  and  key  milestones  achieved  such  as 
Implementation Cases, establishing causal links between the EU R&I funding and innovation supporting the 
seamless  integration  and  harmonization  of  transport  modes,  the  more  efficient  management  of  physical 
information and financial flows, reducing negative impacts, such as carbon emission and congestion, ensuring 
free and seamless movement of goods and enhancing digital transformation.   

This report contains clear actionable items, such as cases on how to implement the Outcomes or build on the 
Implementation  Cases  for  the  Cloud  ‘Monitoring  and  implementing  efficient  and  zero-emission  freight 
transport’.   

The methodology to develop this report is shown in Figure 3. First, BOOSTLOG analyses the EU R&I results to 
identify  key outcomes. The  Outcomes are then analysed based on the achieved  Technical Readiness Level 
(TRL) of the project results and further development. The organizations with most frequent participation in 
projects, for each Cloud, are mapped, as well as individual people from those organizations participating in 
the projects considered (i.e., notably our “experts”).   

Semi-structured interviews (see Annex I) have been undertaken with the experts (a list of the experts can be 
also be found in Annex I), to validate the outcomes and gather additional missing information that are relevant 
to the scope of the analysis, as well as to investigate which Outcomes have rolled out into Implementation 
cases (i.e. they have been implemented and adopted by the freight transport and logistics stakeholders).   
The survey results have been the primary input for a BOOSTLOG cloud report, and it is complemented with 
desk research carried out on most relevant projects deliverables and communications, market/sector current 
practice analysis and the market solutions implemented and adopted including examples of Implementation 
Cases.  

The first release of a report is submitted to the experts to get their feedback. Additionally, a complementary 
discussion is done in an online cloud-related working session (workshop) for final validation of the report. The 
final  (validated)  report  will  be  presented  in  a  webinar,  where  the  ALICE  members  and  other  relevant 
influencing stakeholders are invited as BOOSTLOG partners networks.  

Methodology for the development of a BOOSTLOG cloud report  

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

2  Why Efficient and Zero-emission freight transport 

2.1 

Introduction 

The Paris Agreement, adopted in 2015, set a target to limit the rise in mean global temperature to well below 
2  °C  (3.6  °F)  above  pre-industrial  levels,  and  preferably  limit  the  increase  to  1.5  °C1.  Reaching  the  more 
ambitious goal of 1.5 °C is appreciated to require that GHG emissions are reduced by 45% by 2030 and reach 
net zero by 2050. Under the European Climate Law, the European Union (EU) is committed to reducing its 
GHG  emissions  by  a minimum of  55%  by  2030,  compared  to  the  levels  in  1990, with  the  ultimate  goal  of 
achieving climate neutrality by 2050.  

It is appreciated that transport is responsible for about a quarter of the EU’s total GHG emissions. However, 
until recent initiatives, CountEmissions EU, there has not been any common framework to calculate and report 
transport-related GHG emissions. 

The road freight sector, and especially the heavy-duty sector, has increased its CO2 emissions factor by 5,5% 
(2019) compared to the levels in 2000. This is mainly due to an increase in activity, e.g., transporting goods 
with heavy-duty vehicles increased by 31% in the same period. Meanwhile, the increase in activity transporting 
goods by rail and inland waterways was only 5% combined.  Rail and inland waterways are much more efficient 
modes of transport to carry goods compared to road transport,  having an  intensity of one-sixth, and one-
quarter respectively, compared to heavy goods vehicles.  

Shifting logistics operations from heavy-duty road transport to rail and inland waterways has huge potential 
to decrease CO2 emissions in the logistics sector. However, this shift is operationally challenging and there are 
benefits of using road transport, such as flexibility, that the other modes have not been able to compete with.  

The logistics sector is still highly reliant on road transport and heavy-duty vehicles, and serious actions must 
be taken to both decarbonise and make road transport more efficient. This transition is already happening, 
led  and  supported  by  several  legislative  actions  from  the  EC,  such  as  the  Revision  of  the  CO2  emission 
standards  for  Heavy-Duty  Vehicles  (HDV)2,  the  Renewable  Energy  Directive  II  (  RED  II)3,  Emissions  Trading 
System 2 (ETS 2)4, c, and The alternative fuels infrastructure regulation (AFIR)5 .  

2.2  What is emission monitoring and reporting? 

Just as important as adopting mitigation measures, companies must become better at identifying the actual 
emissions reduction potential of these measures, and be better at gauging the cost-efficiency of the solutions 
they ultimately use. For example, liquid natural gas (LNG) trucks receive financial benefits in some Member 
States in the EU, but actually show little to no climate benefit6. LNG trucks are still touted as climate-friendly 
by trucking operators. What could have caused the confusion in this case? Two possible factors, as illustrated 
by the Figure 4 below, are i) the neglect of other GHG besides CO2 and ii) the neglect of upstream emissions 

1 The Paris Agreement, 2015, https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement 
2 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_23_763 
3https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/renewable-energy/renewable-energy-directive-targets-and-rules/renewable-energy-
directive_en 
4https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/eu-emissions-trading-system-eu-ets/ets-2-buildings-road-transport-and-additional-
sectors_en 
5 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_1867 
6 Oeko-Institut e.V. & ICCT, 2020: https://www.oeko.de/en/up-to-date/2020/lng-trucks-not-an-option-for-climate-protection 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

caused by the production of the fuels. This and other challenges have made the topic of emissions calculation 
a lot more important in actually mitigating climate change. 

Transport emission calculation is typically shorthand for a lifecycle assessment of the operational emissions 
from transport activity. The scope of what is included is dependent on the purpose of the calculation and the 
requirements set by the industry, standards or legislation. For instance, the lifecycle assessment could include 
the emissions from the vehicle lifecycle (i.e. materials processing, vehicle production, logistics, and end-of-life 
method).  Similarly,  the  GHG  Protocol  differentiates  between  Scope  1  and  Scope  3,  when  it  comes  to  fuel 
combustion.  Scope  1  only  includes  tailpipe  emissions,  while  the  upstream  emissions  fall  under  Scope  3 
Category 3. For the logistics sector, a standardized methodology is required as well that fulfils the needs of 
the industry and can be applied in the industry.  

 The  emitted  Green  House  Gasses  (GHG,  gCO2/km)  for  diesel  and  LNG  burned  in  a  spark 
ignition (SI) engine and a high-pressure direct injection (HPDI) engine on a 100 and 20 years 
scale. It is clear that the CO2 tailpipe emissions are not only emissions, also other GHG (NOx, 
and CH4) need be taken into account, just as the venting and boil-off of CH47  

Some of the purposes are listed below. 

•  Monitor progress and mitigate emissions. Companies may use a widely accepted methodology to 
calculate the emissions within their own transport chains, whether conducted by their own fleet or 
outsourced. Based on which, especially if they calculated the emissions with sufficient granularity, they 
would be able to create a mitigation plan. As the transport system is still predominantly dependent on 
fossil fuels, reducing emissions was synonymous with reducing fuel combustion, which served as an 
economic motivation for businesses. 

7 https://www.oeko.de/fileadmin/oekodoc/LNG-in-trucks.pdf 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

•  Evaluation of emission reduction projects. Evaluating emission reduction projects, whether conducted 

internally, within the value chain8, or purchased through carbon offsetting programs, require a 
standardized methodology to increase transparency and trust.  

• 

•  Sustainability reporting. Many organizations carry out voluntary sustainability reporting according to 
the GHG Protocol. These may be published in their own (annual) sustainability reports, or through 
initiatives such as the Carbon Disclosure Project or the Science Based Target Initiative.  
Legislative requirements. While a significant portion of companies already report their emissions 
voluntarily, many, especially smaller organizations, do not. Further, many may not include emissions 
from transport, which often falls under Scope 3 reporting9. However, the legislative landscape is 
changing with the EU’s Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD), which came into effect early 
2023, and the US Securities and Exchange Commission proposal for climate-related disclosures. Notably, 
the EC has proposed the CountEmissionsEU legislation, which focuses specifically on standardizing the 
emissions calculation and reporting in the transport sector.  

In  the  logistics  sector,  the  de  facto  standard  is  the  ISO  14083  "  Greenhouse  gases  —  Quantification  and 
reporting  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions arising  from transport  chain operations",  which  launched  in March 
2023, as well as the industry standard GLEC Framework10 on which the ISO 14083 was based on. The GLEC 
Framework  itself  was  developed  to  align  with  the  GHG  Protocol  –  a  broad  cross-sector  framework  for 
calculating and reporting emissions from economic activity. Some of the principles that unique to the GLEC 
Framework are presented below. 

•  The  system  boundary  encompasses  all  transport  operations  by  all  freight  modes  (e.g.,  road,  rail, 
pipeline), as well as the hubs (e.g., distribution centers or maritime ports) that precede, follow or link 
them together (International Organization for Standardization, 2023).  

Production 
site

Freight rail 
hub

Freight rail 
hub

Distribution 
Centre

Customer 
warehouse

Example how the scope of calculation covers the full transport chain 

•  The emissions calculation takes a full energy lifecycle perspective, or the well-to-wheel (WTW), that 
takes both the well-to-tank (WTT) and the tank-to-wheel (TTW) stages. The WTT incorporates all the 
emissions from producing, storing, processing, and distributing of the energy-carrier (both fuel and 
electricity), while the TTW incorporates all the emissions from the operations of the vehicle or hub. 
While alternative energy carriers often had zero (or compensated) TTW emissions, the WTT emissions 
varied significantly depending on the type of fuel, production process, and feedstock.  

•  Emissions allocation to customers or shipments were based on transport activity, not using currency 
as a functional indicator. For instance, emissions in a road transport trip were allocated based on an 
indicator of transport activity calculated based on the weight of the shipment and transport distance.  

8  Smart  Freight  Centre.  2023.  “Voluntary  Market  Based  Measures  Framework  for  Logistics  Emissions  Accounting  and  Reporting.” 
https://www.flexmail.eu/f-902b8a2dc48f0681. 
9 Smart Freight Centre and CDP. 2020. “Closing the Logistics Emissions Disclosure Gap: An Analysis of Emissions Disclosure to CDP by 
Corporations Worldwide.” 
10  Global  Logistics  Emissions  Council  (GLEC):  https://www.smartfreightcentre.org/en/our-programs/global-logistics-emissions-
council/ 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

These principles, while broad, allow for companies to at the very least, get better at monitoring their own 
climate change impact. There are other aspects that could be included that have been identified, which would 
allow companies to more accurately understand its impact, not just from the vehicle operations but also from 
the manufacturing of vehicles and transport infrastructure, the emissions from digital infrastructure, and the 
emissions from packaging. Besides these activities, there are also other types of emissions that cause climate 
change but through different means, such as the short-lived climate pollutants or the impact of water vapour 
from aviation emissions.  

2.3  What is efficient freight transport? 

There are several definitions for efficiency in (freight) transportation partly depending on what is meant by 
efficiency  and  also  efficiency  at  what  level,  e.g.,  from  a  logistics  operator  point  of  view  or  from  a  road 
authority? It is worth highlighting some of the different perspectives before mentioning what will be the main 
focus of this report.  

Transportation efficiency in society  

This definition, used by e.g., the Swedish Transport Administration and the Swedish Energy Agency, takes a 
broader perspective and defines "A society where the transportation system is used more resource-efficiently 
and where actions and actors are based on the perspective of primarily improving the accessibility within the 
transportation system". Some of the proposed measures to increase transportation efficiency are actions that 
reduce the number of vehicle movements, measures to better utilize the infrastructure through, for example, 
deliveries at times other than during rush hours, and measures to reduce emissions and noise from vehicles.  

Examples of indicators that are relevant to increasing transportation efficiency are i) time precision, a physical 
shipment or delivery takes place within specified timeframes ii) arrives at the right location iii) in the right 
condition,  iv)  provided  with  the  right  services  to  conduct  the  shipment/delivery  v)  optimizing  the  use  of 
current  infrastructure  vi)  while  minimizing  the  wear  and  tear  of  roads  vii)  reducing  noise  emissions  and 
emissions  of  harmful  substances  (such  as  GHG)  viii) not  contributing  to  traffic accidents  etc.  Furthermore, 
additional indicators such as i) resilience,  by having alternative  transport solutions available  in the case  of 
(un)foreseeable  disruptions  in  society,  ii)  reducing  the  harm  of  the  transport  system  on  biodiversity  and 
protected  land  and  iii)  that  the  execution  of  transportation  does  not  significantly  contribute  to  actual  or 
perceived barriers for the rest of society, can also be included.  

This definition, with examples of measures and indicators, showcases that increasing transportation efficiency 
in society is a complex process connected to many factors such as traffic safety, health and land protection. 
However,  this  perspective  on  transportation  efficiency  has  also  been  criticised  by  several  actors  in  the 
transport  sector.  One  of  the  criticisms  is  that  transportation  should  be  able  to  increase,  but  the  overall 
emissions and other negative effects of transportation should be reduced.  

Energy efficiency in (freight) transport  

Energy efficiency in transport is defined by the European Environment Agency as  i) the energy intensity of 
passenger and freight transport, i.e. energy consumption per unit of transport activity (MJ/passenger-km and 
MJ/tonne-km), and by mode and, ii) the fuel efficiency of new cars and of the total cars fleet i.e. fuel use per 
km (litre/100 km) or (kWh/km). Increasing energy efficiency in freight transport are measure used to reduce 
the energy used per transport unit, in this case, tonne-km.   

Trucks,  including  heavy-duty  trucks,  consume  significantly  more  energy  per  tonne-km  than  rail  or  ship 
transport.  However,  as  mentioned  earlier,  shifting  operations  from  heavy-duty  road  transport  to  rail  and 
inland waterways is challenging, and in many cases not realistic to do in the short term. There is a need to 
make heavy-duty trucks and HD fleets more energy-efficient. There are several promising solutions, some of 
them covered in other Cloud reports, such as Physical Internet, digital solutions, and potentially cooperative, 
connected and automated mobility (CCAM) solutions. Other solutions, such as the technical improvements of 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       12 

 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

the  vehicles  to  increase  the  payload  (e.g.,  High-capacity  transport)  and  to  improve  the  driveline  and 
aerodynamics,  solutions  contributing  to  route  optimisation  of  vehicles  and  fleets,  and  human  behaviour 
factors, e.g., solutions enabling more efficient driving (e.g., eco-driving), will be included in this report.  

Energy efficiency and reduction of GHG emissions 

There  is a clear correlation between energy  and GHG emissions:  less energy used usually means less GHG 
emissions are emitted, if all the other factors are the same. This is also true for zero-emission vehicles since 
zero-emission  only  refers  to  pipeline  emissions.  Increased  efficiency  is  hence  needed,  no  matter  if  zero-
emission vehicles are used or not. However, zero-emission vehicles such as electric trucks, do impose new 
opportunities  and  challenges  to  become  more  energy-efficient,  compared  to  ICE  trucks.  This  means  that 
insights made on e.g., route optimizations, eco-driving in ICE trucks etc. cannot simply be fully transferred to 
electric trucks without any adaptations. 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       13 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

2.4  What is zero-emission freight transport?  

ACEA (2022) appreciates that there are approximately 6,2 million trucks (N2 and N3), of which the majority 
are run on diesel. Only 0,5% of all new trucks sold today are electrically chargeable (battery electric, plug-in 
hybrid) which accounts for 0,2% of all the trucks on the road in the EU. Only 0.1% have a full zero-emission 
powertrain11. 

Zero-emission  freight  transport  includes  in  this  report  trucks  with  electrified  powertrains.  with  two 
technologies,  battery  electric  and  hydrogen  fuel  cell  electric,  which  are  being  or  will  be  demonstrated  in 
several European R&I projects, will be discussed further in this Cloud Report. 

The use of biofuels, such as Hydrotreated Vegetable Oil (HVO) and biomethane can lead to a reduction in GHG 
emissions, especially Tank-To-Wheel (TTW) emissions. Nevertheless, as explained in Section 1.2, we will not 
assess biofuels, as their implementation can be done by conventional ICE and will not have an impact on the 
logistic operations. 

Both zero-emission truck technologies have an electric motor instead of an ICE. They also have high power 
components and battery packs installed in between the axles and under the fifth wheel. However, the total 
battery capacity of the Battery electric heavy-duty road vehicles (BE-HDV) will be higher than the FCE-HDV. 
The main difference between BE-HDV and FCE-HDV is that fuel cell packs and hydrogen storage vessels are 
also mounted on a FCE-HDV. Mostly, the fuel cell packs are mounted in between the axles and the hydrogen 
storage vessels at the back of the drivers’ cabin. 

First of all, the energy source of both should be  chosen wisely. Depending on the energy source the WTW 
emissions could be even worse than conventional ICE technology. The JEC study shows that with electricity 
from  wind  energy  emission,  a  emission  reduction  can  be  attained  for  both  battery  and  fuel  cell  electric 
technology 12. Nevertheless, when the electricity is produced from a coal-fired gas plant, there is no positive 
effect on the overall emissions.  

BE-HDV will be used for missions with a relatively shorter distance. The commercial battery electric trucks now 
available  have  a  range  up  to  300km.  Battery  electric  trucks  with  a  range  of  up  to  700km  are  under 
development. Hydrogen could be a solution for use cases where a minimal fuelling time is of importance or 
electric  grid  restrictions  are  in  play.  The  current  fuel  cell  trucks  (in  demonstration  phase)  with  a  working 
pressure of 350 bar have a driving range of around 400km. Further increase of the driving range up to 700km 
is expected, when 700 bar technology is implemented. Next to the technical specification, the actual market 
uptake of zero-emission trucks is also dependent on policy framework. ACEA states that the registrations of 
zero-emission  vehicles  (BEV,  FCEV)  have  accelerated  from  692  (in  2019)  to  1,239  (in  2020)  and  >2,500  in 
202213. 

Also, the availability of the infrastructure to fuel and charge the trucks need to be considered to assess the 
readiness to implement zero-emission trucks. The new Alternative Fuels Infrastructure Regulation (AFIR) sets 
mandatory deployment targets for both electric recharging and hydrogen refuelling infrastructure for the road 
sector14. 

We see that existing and new companies are bringing the regulation in practice. One example of a joint venture 
is Milence (Daimler Trucks, the TRATON GROUP and Volvo Group). The joint venture is committed to build and 

11 https://www.acea.auto/files/ACEA-report-vehicles-in-use-europe-2023.pdf 
12 https://joint-research-centre.ec.europa.eu/welcome-jec-website_en 
https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/JRC121213/jec_wtw_v5_121213_final.pdf 
13 https://www.acea.auto/files/Fact-sheet-CO2_standards_for_heavy_duty_vehicles.pdf 
14 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_1867 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       14 

 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

operate 1700 high-capacity public charging points by 2027 in Europe15. Amazon developed an open-source 
tool CHALET, that can identify priority locations for charging infrastructure across Europe16.    

Diesel truck 

A diesel truck has a driving range of at least 1000 kilometre, some versions have a fuel tank up to 1200 liter 
and  can  drive  more  than  4000  km  on  one  refuelling.  The  high  energy  density  of  diesel,  in  both  mass  and 
volume, make it an ideal energy carrier, which can be stored on the truck in a compact way, without affecting 
the payload.  In addition, with high capacity pumps the truck can be refuelled in minutes. All these aspects, 
the long driving range, compact fuel storage, fast refuelling time and full payload available, make the diesel 
truck a solution for all missions. Unfortunately, not the same amount of energy can be stored on zero-emission 
trucks  in the form of electricity or hydrogen, since  the  current storage methods are less volume  dense. In 
addition, the energy flow of charging or refuelling is significantly smaller than fuelling a diesel. This leads to 
more time needed to charge or fuel and lower driving ranges for zero-emission trucks. There currently is no 
one zero-emission truck solution that can do all missions. 

Battery electric trucks  

The availability of battery electric vehicles is increasing rapidly. All European truck manufacturers have either 
already started or are about to start series production of their new zero emission trucks. The driving range 
and loading capacity of BE trucks are limited in comparison to diesel trucks. The heavy battery pack is the main 
reason for this17.  

BE-HDV vehicles will be charged at DC/DC chargers. At the moment 350 kW chargers are commonly being 
built, also for the passenger market. However, it is not sure that trucks will be capable to use the chargers 
intended for the passenger market, due to height, weight and turning circle restrictions. A trend to megawatt 
charging systems (MCS) for freight transport applications is visible. 

The charging power will depend on the logistic use case. Overnight charging at a relatively low power will be 
possible for some use cases, while for others charging time needs to be minimized to achieve optimal logistic 
operations and opportunity charging with MCS is the way to go. With the current technology charging time 
will vary between hours to half an hour, depending on charging power, battery size and the battery state of 
charge starting value. 

Currently,  European  R&I  project  are  trying  to  identify  the  main  corridor  and  hubs  were  the  charging 
infrastructure needs to be installed, plus specifying the power and amount of chargers. AFIR provides an initial 
planning but needs refinement (e.g. upscaling of chargers, emerging charging technologies). To achieve a more 
sophisticated planning for infrastructure, the energy need for logistics needs to be mapped. The energy need 
is  related  to  the  truck  specifications,  optimal  route,  the  resting  period  for  drivers,  traffic  and  weather 
conditions etc. This can be done by for example building innovative Digital Twins (DT) and adopting planning 
and fleet management systems. 

Overall, the battery electric powertrain will have a high efficiency, especially when looking from TTW and WTT 
perspective. For BE trucks the renewable energy can be transported by the grid and charged to the vehicle 
without any further conversion to a molecule, grid losses and losses by (fast) charging should be accounted 
for. The order of magnitude of these losses are estimated to be between 10% and 15%. In the vehicle itself 

https://www.aboutamazon.eu/news/job-creation-and-investment/amazon-boosts-european-charging-infrastructure-planning-

15 https://milence.com/about/ 
16 
with-new-technology 
17 https://www.acea.auto/files/Getting_ZeroEmissionTrucks_on_the_road.pdf 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

there will be losses due to DC/AC conversion and overall engine and transmission losses, with a total loss of 
around 10%. In total the efficiency will be around 75 to 80%. This energy efficiency is the main benefit of BE 
trucks, it is significantly more efficient than diesel trucks, meaning that less primary energy will be needed to 
power BE trucks. At the moment, the main barriers for BE truck implementation are still limited capabilities to 
fulfil long distance missions, uncertainty about availability of sufficient (MW) charging infrastructure and the 
uncertainty about how its implementation will affect the logistic operation.  

Fuel cell electric vehicles  

At this moment, European Tier I Truck OEMs do not have fuel cell electric hydrogen trucks in their portfolio. 
Only the Hyundai Xcient FC is on the market18. Nevertheless, several demonstration projects are ongoing. 

If  we  look  to  the  hydrogen  pathway,  water  or  steam  can  be  transformed  to  hydrogen  and  oxygen  by 
electrolysis. Current efficiencies of water electrolysis are ranging between 70 to 80%, you than need to take 
into account the efficiencies of the hydrogen transport, storage and fuelling. In the vehicles itself you have a 
fuel cell (70 to 80% efficient) and again the needed DC/AC conversion and engine and transmission losses. In 
total the efficiency of the full chain is estimated to be around 25 to 30%. 

The driving range of a FCE trucks is determined by the amount of hydrogen that can be stored on the vehicle, 
which on its turn is depending on the state of the hydrogen and the working pressure. Currently, there are 
two working pressures seen as standard: 350 and 700 bar. 700 bar is the standard of passenger vehicles, while 
busses,  refuse  trucks  and the  already  in Europe  demonstrated trucks have  a working pressure  of 350 bar. 
Trucks with a working pressure of 700 bar are still under development and will be first demonstrated in the 
ongoing H2Haul project (Section 4.4 for more information).  

Some  Truck  OEMs  are  also  looking  into  liquid  hydrogen.  Liquifying  hydrogen  will  demand  energy  (8-13 
kWh/kg), however transporting liquid hydrogen is more efficient than gaseous one due to the higher energy 
density. Also, the design of the liquid hydrogen refuelling station is expected to have a smaller footprint and 
be more  cost-effective than hydrogen in gas form.  Liquid hydrogen vessels are also cylindrical shaped and 
could be placed between the axles, which is beneficial for the truck design and capabilities. Daimler is the only 
European truck manufacturer that is demonstrating liquid hydrogen for trucks. 

FCE trucks working on gaseous hydrogen are refuelled at hydrogen refuelling station (HRS). Most of the current 
HRS are working following the cascade principle. A cascade HRS consists of 4 or 5 parts. The first part is the 
hydrogen supply for the station. The hydrogen can be delivered by tube trailers, pipeline or it can be produced 
on site by electrolysis. The second part is the hydrogen storage, the third part is hydrogen compression, the 
forth part is cooling (which is at this moment not mandatory for heavy-duty HRS at 350 bar) and the last part 
is the dispenser for refuelling. The storage and compressor should be designed in such way that the refuelling 
demand, expressed in total amount of hydrogen refuelled during a day combined with the peak demand at a 
certain  moment  during  the  day,  can  be  met.  Cooling  is  mandatory  for  700  bar  stations,  since  cooling  is 
necessary to prevent the hydrogen storage vessels in the vehicle to overheat. 

At the moment, barriers for 700 bar truck refuelling are: 

-  Development and standardisation of components that can withstand hydrogen at 700 bar and are 

safe to be mounted on a driving vehicle 

-  Development and standardisation of components for high flow (at least 120 g/s) hydrogen refuelling 

stations with a fuelling capacity of more than 40 kg at once 

-  Development of a refuelling protocol for 700 bar trucks (PRHYDE project19) 

18 https://www.acea.auto/files/Getting_ZeroEmissionTrucks_on_the_road.pdf 
19 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/874997 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       16 

 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

The main benefit of FCE-HDV is it charging time. It is expected that fuelling a FCE-truck will be less than 20 
minutes. The main barriers for widespread deployment are its low WTW energy efficiency and the absence of 
green hydrogen in sufficient quantities at feasible price. 

2.5  Expected positive impacts 

In this section the expected positive impacts on logistics related to ‘monitoring and implementing efficient 
and zero-emission freight transport’ are given. We will not focus on emission monitoring and reporting, as 
there will no direct impact on logistics. 

As  stated  in  before  the  main  goals  for  efficient  freight  is  to  increase  the  transport  capacity  and  the  fuel 
efficiency. We identified three action areas for more research in efficient freight transport.  

Aerodynamics 
Improvement of the aerodynamics of trucks and trailers impacts the fuel consumption significantly. A positive 
impact on the environment, the energy consumption and the transport cost will be the result. 

Load efficiency  
The load efficiency can be improved in many ways design of trailer, improve the logistic process, integrating 
Physical internet (Cloud Report VI), high capacity vehicles (EMS)… These improvements will have a positive 
impact on transport cost, emission reduction and congestion. 

Eco driving electric driveline 
The driving behaviour impacts fuel consumption, therefore eco-driving is investigated in several R&I projects. 
However, changes in eco-driving rules are expected when the driveline of the trucks becomes electric, and 
regenerative breaking is possible, which should be assessed further. When implemented, a positive impact on 
transport costs, energy consumption and emissions is expected. 

The shift to zero-emission road transport is done to lower the emissions. Nevertheless, since the capabilities 
of a zero-emission trucks are different than for a diesel truck the impact of the implementation will not have 
an unambiguous positive impact. We therefore also define action areas for zero-emission trucks that need 
further research and innovations.  

Zero emission Truck and trailers 

Currently, battery electric trucks are commercially available. Hydrogen trucks with a combustion engine or a 
fuel  cell are  being  demonstrated  at  small scale  in  R&I  projects.  Nevertheless,  their  capabilities  differ  from 
diesel  trucks  –  less  driving  range,  more  time  needed  to  charge/fuel  –  so  further  research  to  improve  the 
capabilities and mature the technology are needed. 

In addition to the trucks, we should also include innovations in trailers. At this moment, cooled trailers or 
trailers with a tailgate use energy generated by the diesel engine. If we want full zero-emission truck-trailer 
combinations innovations to electrify the trailer will be needed.  

The  implementation  of  zero-emission  trucks  and  trailers  will  have  a  positive  impact  on  the  environment. 
However, due to the higher investment cost and different capabilities compared to the current technologies, 
we expect that the cost will be higher and the capacity will decrease. Further research to develop the next, 
improved generation of zero-emission trucks and trailers.  

The  development  of  new  generations  of  zero-emission  trucks  and  trailers  will  have  positive  impact  on 
emissions, energy consumption and overall transport efficiency and cost. 

Charging and fuelling infrastructure 

The success of the implementation of zero-emission truck-trailer combination is strongly depending on the 
availability of charging and fuelling infrastructure. Next to availability, the concept and capabilities of both will 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       17 

 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

improve. New charging concepts, such as Megawatt Charging System (MCS), dynamic charging and electric 
road systems (ERS) are emerging. While HRS with a daily capacity of 6 tonnes and 700 bar refuelling for trucks 
are in development. 

On the short term, the development of new concepts for charging and fuelling will not have a positive impact 
on  logistics  itself  but  will  make  zero-emission  trucks  more  deployable.  On  the  longer  term,  trucks  will 
contribute to vehicle-to-grid charging and storage, which can provide cost benefits for the combined energy-
transport system20.  

Fleet integration and route optimisation 

Since the capabilities of zero-emission trucks differ from diesel trucks adaptations in planning, dispatching and 
route selection are expected. New software that is able to take into account the limitations and opportunities 
of zero-emission trucks is needed. The software will have a positive impact on capacity utilisation, the overall 
cost, improve the energy utilisation and the transport efficiency. It will also improve the data quality and the 
means of communication from and with the vehicles, which is an important topic for the further digitalisation 
of logistics. 

Ecosystem building 

Although currently the cost to operate of zero-emission trucks does not reach diesel parity, it is expected to 
reach this level in the near future for battery-electric trucks, hydrogen technology will be later21. Ecosystem 
building to reach economy of scale is crucial In addition, further assessment of innovative business models like 
(pay-per-use, Transport as a Service) is necessary, as the end customer may be willing to pay more for zero-
emission transport.  

Legislation 

Legislation is the main driver for the implementation of zero-emission trucks. Until now, the zero-emission 
road transport ecosystem is not mature, further legislative incentives will be needed. This also includes the 
adaptation of technical regulations and making national legislation more uniform.  

Digitalisation 

Digitalisation  of  logistics  is  necessary  to  achieve  further  improvements.  Currently,  the  concept  of  V2X, 
communication with the vehicle (both truck and trailer) with something else, is a concept in development that 
will  be  needed  to  ease  the  implementation  of  zero-emission  trucks  and  CCAM.  Concepts  as  bidirectional 
charging,  route  optimisation  using  GPS  data,  fleet  management  with  the  remaining  driving  range  of  zero-
emission trucks as input, V2G communication during charging and communication with HRS to improve the 
refuelling, are only possible when the vehicles can communicate and share qualitative, well-defined data to 
infrastructure or the cloud. Definition of parameters and how to measure and communicate them across the 
whole industry are necessary.  

20 Gaete-Morales, C., Jöhrens, J., Heining, F., & Schill, W. P. (2023). Power sector effects of alternative options for 
electrifying heavy-duty vehicles: go electric, and charge smartly.  https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.16629 

21 The potential of e-fuels for heavy duty road transport in the Netherlands, TNO 2023 R10213 
https://uploads-ssl.webflow.com/6144857e3aac5ad07ebf212f/63e6520e75c09309becdc952_2023_TNO_smartport_e-
fuels%20for%20road%20transport.pdf 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Table 1: Action areas for efficient and zero-emission freight transport and expected impacts 

Action area 

Aerodynamics 

Load efficiency 

Eco  driving  electric 
driveline 

Zero emission Truck 
and trailers 

and 

Charging 
fuelling 
infrastructure 

Fleet integration and 
route optimisation 

Ecosystem building 

Digitalisation 

Expected impacts 

Decreased 
environmental  impact 
(including,  but  not 
limited to reduction of 
noise) 

Improved  capacity 
utilisation  of  barge, 
train and truck 

Decreased cost of 
transport 
& 
overall logistics 

Improve 
energy 
consumption 

Increase 
transport 
efficiency 

quality 

Data 
and 
communication 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

2.6  Barriers and guidelines  

In the previous section the expected positive impacts are described of the identified action areas. We also 
mentioned some of challenges and barriers that need to be overcome. In this section, we will give a structured 
overview of the challenges, barriers and their solution 

Table 2 Barriers hindering efficient and zero-emission logistics 

Monitoring and reporting emissions 

Challenges / Action areas 

Barriers 

Solutions 

Increase the uptake of the ISO 
14083 standard in industry 

Lack of awareness or training 

Activate  via  non-profits  and 
green freight programs 

of  motivation 

Lack 
implement 

to 

Apply 
through 
pressure 
legislation or financial markets 

Improve  the  quality  of  the 
calculations 

Lack  of  ease  to  capture  fuel 
consumption data  

(e.g., 

automate  data 
to 
Tools 
collection 
fuel 
consumption  data  collected 
through 
connected  vehicle 
telematics based on ISO 23795)  

Carriers  are  not  motivated  to 
share the data 

Make 
it 
obligation 

a 

contractual 

Difficult  and  inconvenient  to 
examine all published data  

Implement 
assurance 
an 
scheme and make it mandatory 
for all reporting 

Lack  of  consensus  on  how  to 
produce 
emission 
energy 
factors  

Mobilize  the  LCA  database 
producers  to  harmonize  the 
approach. 

Expand the scope to holistically 
capture climate change impact 

Lack  of  consensus  on  what 
other  types  of  impacts  to  be 
from 
such 
included, 
digitalization or packaging. 

as 

Lack  of  established  emission 
for  many  types  of 
factors 
impacts 
change 
climate 
beyond 
dioxide 
carbon 
emissions  (e.g.  black  carbon, 
aviation water vapor) 

High-level 
climate 
community  

discussion  with 
scientific 

change 

Mobilize  the  LCA  database 
scientific 
and 
producers 
community. 

Monitoring and implementing efficient freight transport 

Challenges / Action areas 

Barriers 

Solutions 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       20 

 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Aerodynamics 

risk  of 

The 
aerodynamic 
additions breaking off or being 
not 
anymore, 
impacts 
application 
negatively 

adjustable 

the 

Load efficiency 

High  capacity  vehicles, 
like 
EMS,  can  not  be  deployed  in 
international missions 

framework 

Regulative 
innovative  trailer  design 
missing 

for 
is 

Eco-driving electric driveline 

that 

Unsure 
eco-driving 
guidelines still apply for trucks 
with electric driveline 

Change  driving  behaviour  to 
drive more eco-friendly 

Location of infrastructure is not 
defined 

Route  optimisation  for  trucks 
with an electric driveline 

The  real  energy  consumption 
of 
is 
unknown 

zero-emission 

trucks 

The  durability  of  aerodynamic 
their 
and 
additions 
adjustability  need 
to  be 
improved,  so  the  risk  of  a 
negative  business 
is 
minimised 

case 

necessary, 

Legal support on national level 
is 
the 
European directive on ‘Weight 
and  dimensions’  is  voted  and 
offer a solution 

until 

and 
to 

The  regulative  frameworks  is 
innovative 
drafted 
load 
concepts 
efficiency 
trailer 
are  made 
electrification 
possible. 

improve 
and 

A  project 
to  assess  how 
regenerative  breaking  of  the 
engine  and  e-axles  can  be 
incorporated 
in  eco-driving 
guidelines can be conducted. 

Awareness 
campaigns, 
apps/services  to  support  eco-
driving should be developed so 
the integration of eco-driving is 
not  an  extra  burden  for  the 
driver. 

infrastructure 

Currently, 
is 
accomplished  on  a  project 
basis. More research is needed 
to  define  the  corridors  and 
hubs  where  infrastructure  can 
be build. Digital twins that take 
into account logistic operation 
and  planning,  grid  availability, 
truck  capabilities…  could  help 
with defining suitable locations 

for 
Demonstration  project 
different  use  cases  under 
(routes, 
varying 
conditions 
to 
weather…)  are  needed 
determine  what  the  energy 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

consumption  of  zero-emission 
trucks in real life is 

Renewable energy, in the form 
of  electricity  and  hydrogen,  is 
not always easily available, plus 
at an acceptable price 

should 

renewable 

energy 
More 
sources 
be 
implemented  in  the  European 
import  of 
energy  grid.  The 
renewable  energy  should  be 
further  investigated.  Business 
scenarios on how diesel parity 
can be met in the future needs 
to be done. 

Monitoring and implementing zero-emission freight transport 

Challenges / Action areas 

Barriers 

Solutions 

Capabilities  and  availability 
trucks  and 
zero  emission 
trailers 

Hydrogen  truck  with  fuel  cell 
technology are not commercial 
available. 

Further  research  to  develop 
mature  fuel  cell  technology  is 
needed.  

the 

zero-
Capabilities  of 
emission 
trailer 
combination are insufficient to 
fulfill certain use cases.  

truck 

Charging 
infrastructure 

and 

fuelling 

are  no 

There 
large-scale 
investments  in  infrastructure, 
since  the  zero-emission  truck 
market  is  just  starting  scaling 
up. 

Legislation 

framework 

Regulative 
to 
operate zero-emission trucks is 
missing.  

trucks 

Further  development  of  the 
zero-emission 
and 
technically. 
trailers 
of  modular 
Development 
be 
can 
solutions,  which 
adapted to the use case.  

AFIR  regulations  instruct  that 
both  charging  and  hydrogen 
infrastructure is built along the 
European TEN-T network.  

Joint  ventures  and  ecosystem 
building  is  happening.  Front 
runners  are  working  together. 
Nevertheless,  this 
is  mostly 
done  on  a  project  basis, while 
further upscaling is needed. 

Sharing  of  assets  can  have  a 
positive aspect on TCO 

for 

Clear  legislation  that  makes  it 
zero-emission 
possible 
to  do  cross-border, 
trucks 
and 
transport 
multimodal 
enter  all 
is 
logistic  nodes 
necessary. 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

3  Analysis of current market practices and trends 

3.1  Overview 

ALICE has published the ‘Roadmap toward Zero Emission Logistics 205022. The roadmap has defined a 
framework for r a decarbonisation roadmap, consisting of identified solution areas, stakeholder groups 
and  transition  management  measures  where  stakeholders  need  to  collaborate  over  time.  This 
framework has been applied by businesses and other innovation developers to advance zero emission 
logistics.  

This chapter provides a compilation of market practices which can be considered as “innovative” in the 
sense  that  they  contribute  to  further  development  of  Efficient  and  zero-emission  logistics.  Such 
practices encompass 

Innovations already in place, 
Innovations under development in dedicated projects or research programs, 

• 
• 
•  Rules, guidelines and technical documentations that pave the way for subsequent application 

of innovative market practices 

We see in Table 3 that for some defined action areas market practices and trends are missing. We did 
not  find  any  projects  or  initiatives  that  looked  into  eco-driving  for  truck  with  electric  drive  trains. 
Currently,  eco-driving  training  are  focussing  on  diesel  truck  driving.  We  believe  that  concepts  like 
regenerative braking will have an effect on eco-driving rules and training. 

Table 3 Current Market practices related to the action areas of ‘Efficient and zero-emission logistics’ 

Action area 

Aerodynamics 

Load efficiency 

Efficient Logistics 

Truck and trailer design 

Efficient and zero-emission freight transport 
Zero emission logistics 

Trailer design, Light weight trailers, 

High capacity combinations 

Eco-driving electric driveline 

(Trainings of drivers) 

Zero emission Truck and trailers 

Charging and fuelling infrastructure 

Fleet integration and route optimisation 

Electrification of trucks and trailers, 

Retrofitting existing trucks 

AFIR, CEF 

Digital 
ESCALATE) 

twin 

(ZEFES, 

EMPOWER, 

Digitalisation 

V2X communication 

Bidirectional charging 

3.2  Market practices: efficient freight transport  

Impactful Legislation  

22 https://www.etp-logistics.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Alice-Zero-Emissions-Logistics-2050-Roadmap-WEB.pdf 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Currently  an  update  of  the  ‘Weight  and  dimensions  directive’  (Council  Directive  96/53/ECEN)  is 
proposed on 11 July 2023. The update was not voted when this Cloud Report has been completed, we 
therefore advise you to check for any changes. 

so  alternative  powertrains 

The directive  and its amendments allow  for  deviations from the  authorised weights  of vehicles  and 
vehicle  combinations, 
zero-emission),  aerodynamic 
improvements  and  intermodal  transport  operations  can  be  carried  out.  The  latest  version  aims  to 
address four barriers: i) the regulative framework for zero-emission trucks and energy saving devices, 
ii) facilitate  intermodal operations, iii) clear rules  to use  longer and heavier vehicle combinations in 
cross border activities and iv) more effective and efficient enforcement of the rules. 

(including 

The following derogations regarding zero-emission vehicle combinations are mentioned in the revision: 

- depending on the weight of the zero-emission vehicle combination a derogation of 2 (36 tonnes) or 4 
(40-44 tonnes) tonnes is granted 

- the weight of the zero-emission truck itself can deviate with a maximum of 2 tonnes.  

- the weight on the driving axle of a zero-emission truck can be 12.5 tonnes 

- the length of the truck can be extended with 90 cm to install zero-emission technology or improve 
aerodynamics, energy efficiency or safety. 

Overall, the proposed derogation can help to compensate for the load capacity losses due to the weight 
of zero-emission technology and the extra length can be used to implement hydrogen technology in a 
safe and more optimal way. 

Aerodynamics and minimizing rolling resistance 

Overcoming resistance, both air and rolling resistance can improve fuel efficiency significantly. All truck 
OEMs are working on durable solutions to improve aerodynamics, which is reducing air resistance. One 
of the key elements to improve aerodynamics is to delay flow separation and keep the air layer as long 
as  possible  in  parallel  to  the  vehicle.  Once  the  flow  detaches  a  wake  is  created,  which  results  in  a 
pressure drag, minimising and delaying flow separation, and minimises pressure drag and energy loss. 
The impact of small gaps and splits on the flow separation is important, therefore new seals have been 
placed to cover small gaps and splits, especially the ones at the vehicle’s front cover.  improvements 
could be filling the void of the footstep box, wider wheels and mudguards to create more alignment, 
new mirror design23 or even replacement by cameras. Next to less drag, the replacement of mirrors, 
can increase safety due to a larger field of vision and improved vision at night24. 
According to the EU regulations25, truck manufacturers in EU countries can extend the front of vehicles 
by up to 90 cm and trailers can be extended with 50cm, on the condition that the loading capacity is 
not increased. Also the extension at the back should be able to retract or fold (manual or automated), 
so the vehicle does follow sizing regulations when standing still. 
The rolling resistance can be improved by tyre innovations. 

Trailer design 

23https://www.volvotrucks.com/en-en/news-stories/stories/2022/apr/the-new-aerodynamic-improvemens-to-the-volvo-fh-how-it-was-
done.html 

24 https://www.orlaco.com/mirroreye-trucks 

25 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32019R1892 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

In practice, 60% of the goods in trailers are palletized, which means that volume not optimal used in 
some  cases.  Innovative  trailer  designs  as  double  decking26  are  brought  on  the  market.  In  the 
TRANSFORMERS and AEROFLEX, other innovations like aerodynamic shape27, loading optimisation tools 
and optimised connection to a loading dock so one pallet more can be loaded, were established and 
are  being  brought  to  the  market.  These  projects  have  shown  that  there  are  still  low  hanging  fruit 
innovations in terms of trailer design. Light weight trailers are the main innovation for mass-limited 
missions28,29. 

In addition, some trailer manufacturers and European R&I projects are investigating the electrification 
of  trailers  (cooling  and  tailgate),  by  e.g.  implementing  solar  panels  in  the  trailers  roof30.  Also,  the 
integration of regenerative energy axles with cloud technology and the implementation of batteries on 
the trailer are investigated (cfr. ZEFES project)31. 

High Capacity Combinations – European Modular System 

An example of a high capacity combination is the European Modular System (EMS). EMS allows the 
combination  of  existing  loading  units  (so-called  modules)  into  longer  and  possibly  heavier  vehicles 
combinations, which can be used on some parts of the road network32. National authorities can allow 
vehicle combinations that are longer  the  16.5  meters  (maximum length defined in Europe) and can 
exceed the weight of 40 tonnes. The fact that national authorities are granting permissions, is the main 
limitation to bring EMS in practice. Currently, the national legislation is not uniform and cross-border 
operations are not possible. The proposed ‘Weight and Dimensions’ directive aims to ease the use of 
EMS by making cross-border operations possible. Nevertheless, this directive is not voted yet and not 
into force. 

EMS can be divided in EMS1, consisting of combinations of trucks, dolly’s, trailers and swap body’s with 
a total length not exceeding 25.25 meter, and EMS2, also called duo-trailer or super eco combi, where 
to semi-trailers can be combined, exceeding the length of EMS1. Overall, both EMS concepts improves 
road freight transport efficiency and reduces its environmental impact. 

EMS is complementary to other modes, especially EMS2, since  standard  semi-trailers are  used.  The 
smaller  trailers  used  in  EMS1  combinations  do  not  use  the  slots  on  boats  and  trains  optimally.  All 
interviewees mentioning EMS, stated that EMS should not be seen as a competitor to other modes of 
transport, it is complementary and it is spurring innovation in related modes, such as rail, benefitting 
consumers33. 

3.3  Market practices: zero-emission freight transport 

Impactful Legislation  

26 https://www.krone-trailer.com/en/news/detail/aus-der-praxis-fuer-die-praxis-vorstellung-des-vario-line 
27 https://www.cargobull.com/en/-/media/project/scb-sites/scb-global-site/media-center-en/test-report-scs-ecoflex.pdf 

28 https://www.cargobull.com/en/products/curtainsider/curtainsider-semi-trailer/x-light 
29 https://www.compositesworld.com/articles/recycled-carbon-fiber-for-lower-priced-lightweight-in-heavy-trucks 
30 https://cordis.europa.eu/article/id/421568-smart-solar-solution-delivers-cleaner-mobility-on-the-road 
31 https://www.cargobull.com/en/press/2023/typgenehmigung_skoe_cool 
32 https://www.acea.auto/fact/european-modular-system/ 
33 https://www.acea.auto/fact/european-modular-system/ 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

The European Commission is committed to reduce its CO2 emission as stated in Section 2.1. Since road 
transport is a significant contributor, with 6% of the total emissions, the Regulation on CO2 emissions 
standards for heavy-duty vehicles was implemented and states that a reduction with 15% needs to be 
reached by 2025 and 30% by 203034.  In 2023, the Commission proposed to raise the ambition even 
more and go for a reduction of 45% by 2030 and by 2040 a reduction of 90%. These new targets need 
to voted. 

Low emission zones are implied in more than 250 European cities to achieve better air quality. These 
zones  also  apply  for  heavy  duty  transport  for  urban  deliveries.  Transport  companies  are  therefore 
implementing zero-emissions trucks35.  

34 https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/transport/road-transport-reducing-co2-emissions-vehicles/reducing-co2-emissions-heavy-duty-vehicles_en 
35 https://breytner.com/#zero-emission 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Battery electric and fuel cell electric vehicles 

Battery electric trucks  are commercially available.  All European manufacturers are taking orders for 
battery electric trucks36,37,38. They have sold more than 4000 truck in the last 12 months in Europe39. 
The first fleets of battery electric are emerging in Europe40,41. Most studies agree that battery electric 
trucks will be cost-competitive with diesel trucks in the near future for certain use cases42. 

Fuel cell electric hydrogen trucks are not commercially available. Only in Switzerland a fleet of hydrogen 
trucks is operational. Hyundai wants to bring 1600 FC Xcient trucks on the Swiss road by 202543. In 2020 
the  first  units  arrived.  A  pay-per-use  system  was  applied  together  with  H2Energy.  One  of  the  HRS 
developed in the H2Haul project is also used to refuel the Hyundai trucks. Currently, there should be 
47 trucks in operations. Reasons why the trucks are implemented slower than previous planned, are 
the limited availability of green hydrogen and the energy crisis which has led to higher prices, which 
putted pressure on the economic viability of the implementation of FCE-HDV. However, Hyundai and 
H2Energy  state  that  the  partners  will  continue  the  project.  Overall,  it  is  not  expected  that  fuel  cell 
electric trucks will be competitive in the near future. One reason is that green hydrogen is not available, 
and certainly not at an acceptable price.  

Retrofitting of existing trucks and hydrogen combustion engines 

Several  companies  are  specialising  in  retrofitting of  diesel truck  to  battery  electric,  fuel  cell  electric 
hydrogen or even hydrogen combustion engine propelled trucks44.  

Hydrogen can not only be used in fuel cells, it can also be combusted in ICE. The use of a combustion 
engine  has  some  advantages  compared  to  fuel  cell  electric.  The  driveline  of  combustion  engines  is 
known, is more robust and has a longer lifetime than the existing fuel cells. Also, the quality of the 
hydrogen  does  not  need  to  be  fuel  cell  quality.  Hydrogen  combustion  engines  are  seen  as  a 
complementary zero-emission option45. However, a major drawback is that they emit NOx . In addition, 
they have the same drawback of other hydrogen solutions (low efficiency and lack of supply of green 
hydrogen).  

Route and mission planning optimisations 

We  see  that  with  the  emerging  of  zero-emission  truck,  the  interest  in  route  and  mission  planning 
optimisation is again rising. Previous the planning of a ICE fleet took only into consideration of following 
missions  characteristics:  distance,  volume  or weight payload,  time  and  the  overall  utilisation of  the 

36https://www.volvotrucks.com/en-en/news-stories/press-releases/2023/mar/volvo-delivers-20-electric-trucks-to-dfds-in-gothenburg.html 

37 https://www.scania.com/ph/en/home/about-scania/newsroom/news/2023/Scania-secures-significant-truck-order-in-the-UK.html 

38https://press.mantruckandbus.com/corporate/already-more-than-500-order-enquiries-man-to-launch-electric-truck-for-long-distance-
transport-in-2024/ 

39 Webinar ALICE – Decarbonizing Road Freight Transport vehicles roadmap 

40 https://www.primafrio.com/grupo-primafrio-incorpora-a-su-flota-15-camiones-volvo-fh-electric/ 

41 https://bett.cenex.co.uk/bett-learnings 

42https://www.transportenvironment.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/202210_TNO_-
techno_economic_uptake_potential_of_zero_emission_trucks_in_Europe.pdf 

43 https://hyundai-hm.com/en/2022/10/21/statement-concerning-hyundai-hydrogen-mobility-business-case-in-switzerland/ 

44 https://cordis.europa.eu/article/id/442780-retrofitted-zero-emission-trucks-to-hit-the-road-in-2023 

45 https://www.transportenvironment.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/202304_HDV_CO2_position_paper_final.pdf 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

fleet. When zero-emission trucks come into play, also charging or more regular hydrogen refuellings 
should be taken into account, together with the reduced driving range compared to diesel trucks.  

In  addition,  the  driving  range  of  both  technologies  can  be  affected  by  the  weather  conditions.  The 
fuelling of gaseous hydrogen will be more optimal at colder conditions, since the mass of hydrogen 
refuelled is inverse correlated to ambient temperature. Battery technology will work more efficient in 
environments  at  ambient  temperature.  All  these  variables,  even  degeneration  of  the  fuel  cell  and 
battery capacity, should be taken into account in future planning and dispatching software that can 
calculate the optimal route for a mission. Currently, R&I projects (ESCALATE, EMPOWER and ZEFES) are 
working on digital twins, which can be the basis of these software. Another aspect of route optimisation 
that should be taken into account is the availability of infrastructure.  

Penalties Truck OEMs 

Most truck OEMs are investing in ZERO-EMISSION TRUCKS, since heavy penalties will be applied if their 
fleet does not meet the CO2 target (set to 15% emission reduction by 2025 and 30% by 203046, stricter 
targets are proposed). The current penalties are set at €4,250 per g CO2/t∙km in 2025 and €6,800 per 
gCO2/t∙km  in  2030.  The  penalties  are  already  in  force,  even  when  the  targets  are  missed  by  1g 
CO2/t∙km. Currently, the penalties only apply on truck OEMs, not to other stakeholders in the transport 
and logistics value chain47. 

Infrastructure 

The market developments of infrastructure are defined of what is technological feasible and what is 
implied by regulation. 

Electric charging at a power of 350kW is available with CCS technology. However, this amount of power 
is not enough to charge a battery electric truck fast. It will take a hour to recharge the current trucks, 
and the upcoming truck with greater battery capacity, will take multiple hours to charge. Therefore we 
see the  development  of  ultra-fast  charging,  MCS,  charging  at megawatt48.  With this  technology  the 
future truck will be recharged in less than an hour. Also, bidirectional charging is in development for 
passenger cars49, and will be for trucks. Finally, pilots are being held in several countries with dynamic 
charging technology, with overhead lines and induction charging50,51,52.  

Also,  the  HRS  technology  is  evolving.  HRS  with  a  working  pressure  of  350  bar  for  trucks  and  other 
vehicles are available. The first ones were built for buses (JIVE project) or other applications than trucks. 
Hydrogen  fuel  cell  electric  trucks  with  a  working  pressure  of  350  bar  have  been  demonstrated  in 
national  and  regional  R&I  (H2Share).  Now,  the  switch  to  700  bar  is  made,  with  as  main  reason  to 
increase the mass of hydrogen on the truck and the driving range. In the H2Haul project a first 700 bar 
HRS for trucks was built. Others are in development. Also, the daily refuelling capacity of the station is 
increasing to tonnes of hydrogen per day. 

The implementation of the infrastructure is currently is not economically straightforward. Therefore, 
regulation  and  funding  schemes  is  an  important  driver  for  investments.  The  AFIR  sets  targets  for 
recharging and hydrogen refuelling infrastructure for the road sector, for shore-side electricity supply 
in maritime and inland waterway ports, and for electricity supply to stationary aircraft. In this way, a 

46 https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/transport/road-transport-reducing-co2-emissions-vehicles/reducing-co2-emissions-heavy-duty-vehicles_en 
47 https://www.acea.auto/files/Fact-sheet-CO2_standards_for_heavy_duty_vehicles.pdf 
48 https://hochleistungsladen-lkw.de/hola-en/project/ 
49 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/101056934 
50 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/774833 
51 https://press.siemens.com/global/en/feature/ehighway-solutions-electrified-road-freight-transport 
52 https://www.transportenvironment.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/2020_02_RechargeEU_trucks_paper.pdf 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       28 

 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

minimal amount of infrastructure will be available in Europe, enabling the use of zero-emission trucks. 
In  addition,  the  regulations  also  state  best  practices  for  user  experience,  price  transparency  and 
payment options at the station and coherent customer information across the EU53.  

The regulations states that for zero-emission trucks dedicated recharging stations need to be deployed 
every 60 km along the TEN-T core network. The minimum power output must be 350 kW. On the larger 
TEN-T comprehensive network every 100 km dedicated charging equipment should be available. Just 
as, infrastructure for overnight charging at parking areas an in urban nodes for delivery vehicles. The 
coverage of the complete network should be completed by 2030. 

In addition, AFIR states that HRS that can both serve zero-emission trucks and lorries must be deployed 
every 200 km along the TEN-T core network and all urban nodes by 2030, to ensure a sufficiently dense 
network. 

Funding to achieve these charging stations and HRS can be achieved through the Connecting Europe 
Facility (CEF) program. The CEF transport call already selected more than 60 project across Europe for 
funding. When this Cloud Report was written only one remaining cut-off date existed to apply for CEF 
Transport, under  the existing rules. It is expected that  a new  series of calls will be  published in the 
future, however changes in application rules are expected.   

Vehicle Energy Consumption Calculation Tool (VECTO) for trucks and trailers 

The European Commission developed in close collaboration with stakeholders the VECTO tool, which 
is a simulation software that can be used measure the CO2 emissions and fuel consumption of heavy-
duty vehicles (GVW above 3500kg) for specific loads, fuels and mission profiles (e.g., long haul, regional 
delivery, urban delivery, etc.) in a reliable and cost-effective way. Input for the simulation tool are the 
relevant  vehicle  components54.  Since  1  January  2019,  the  tool  is  mandatory  for  new  trucks  under 
certain vehicle categories. From 2024 onwards, trailers will also be certified. Bonus factors for trailers 
will be steering axles and lightweight running gear55.  

Past European projects 
In  this  paragraph  we  mention  some  finished  project  about  hybrid  powertrain  demonstrations  and 
electric  vehicles  and  infrastructure  for  urban  conditions.  We  decided  that  these  projects  are  not  in 
scope.  Nevertheless,  a  lot  of  innovations  were  established  in  these  project  that  helped  to  develop 
current zero-emission truck technology. At the time of the hybrid powertrain projects, the technology 
for full electric trucks with high payloads was not available. Therefore we mention them in this chapter.  

EcoChamp 

EcoChamp56  aimed  to  achieve  efficient,  compact,  low-weight,  robust  and  cost-effective  hybrid 
powertrains for both passenger cars and commercial vehicles (buses, medium and heavy-duty trucks) 
with increased functionality, improved performance, comfort, safety and emissions below Euro 6 or VI, 
all proven under real driving conditions. The project was ongoing between 2015 and 2018, financed 
under H2020, and included 26 partners representing the European automotive industry OEMs (EUCAR), 
suppliers  (CLEPA),  ESPs  and  universities  (EARPA)  including  members of  ERTRAC  and  EGVIA.  The call 
expected  an  impact  to  deliver  demonstrator  vehicles  that  achieve  a  20%  powertrain  efficiency 

53 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_1867 

54 https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/transport-emissions/road-transport-reducing-co2-emissions-vehicles/reducing-co2-emissions-heavy-duty-vehicles_en 

55 https://newsroom-en.bpw.de/pressreleases/eu-requires-climate-friendly-trailers-from-2024-onwards-bpw-products-fulfil-the-requirements-for-vecto-certification-of-trailers-3216797 
56 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/653468 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

improvement and 20% powertrain weight and volume reductions with respect to the ‘best in class’ full 
hybrid  vehicles  on  the  market  in  2013,  whilst  having  a  maximum  10%  cost  premium  over  the 
conventional model upon which the demonstrators are based. Five demonstrators were conducted in 
EcoChamp including two demonstrators with trucks, one delivery truck, IVECO Daily Hybrid, 7.5 tonnes 
and one long-haul truck, DAF XF Long Haulage Hybrid Truck.  

The  result  of the  assessment  was  positive  with the delivery  truck  with  a  30% increased  powertrain 
efficiency  compared  to  Daily  Diesel,  and  a  decrease  in  powertrain  mass  (-27%)  and  volume  (-36%) 
compared to Daily Electric, and with noxious emissions reaching Euro VI. The long-haul truck almost 
met the aimed target for powertrain efficiency with a 17% increase compared to DAF XF Diesel, and a 
decrease  in powertrain mass (-17%) and volume  (-13%) compared to a DAF XF (reference from FP7 
project Convenient since no hybrid long haul truck was available in the market).  

ORCA 

Orca, Optimised Real-world Cost-Competitive Modular Hybrid Architecture for Heavy Duty Vehicles, 
aimed to design a clear and greener yet affordable hybrid drivetrain for heavy-duty vehicles57,58. The 
project  was  ongoing  between  2016-2021,  financed  under  H2020,  and  included  10  partners  from  6 
different European Members States representing all requested competencies in the field of powertrain 
optimization for Heavy- Duty vehicles. The consortium comprises OEMs with IVECO-ALTRA, CRF and 
VOLVO  (also  members  of  EUCAR,  suppliers  VSCM,  BOSCH  and  BLUWAYS,  leading  Engineering  and 
Technology Companies/organizations and Universities with TNO, FRAUNHOFER, and VUB (EARPA). The 
majority are also active members of ERTRAC and EGVIA. The objective of Orca was to:  
• Reduce the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) to the same diesel vehicle TCO level, targeting over 10% 
system cost premium reduction compared to actual IVECO hybrid bus and VOLVO conventional truck 
with the same performances, same functionalities and operative cost, and also targeting up to 10% 
rechargeable energy storage (RES) lifetime/energy throughput improvement. 
•  Improve  the  hybrid  powertrain  efficiency  up  to  5%  compared  to  actual  IVECO  hybrid  bus  and 
conventional  truck  through  optimized  RES  selection  &  sizing  and  by  improving  the  energy  and  ICE 
management. 
•  Reduce  the fuel consumption by 40%  compared to an equivalent conventional HD vehicle  (bus & 
truck). 
• Downsize the ICE by at least 50% compared to actual IVECO hybrid bus and VOLVO conventional truck. 
• Improve the electric range from 10km to 30km by adding the PHEV capabilities and optimising the 
capacity. 
RES 
• Case study assessment to replace a diesel engine by a CNG engine for future heavy-duty vehicles. 

One of the results of the project was developing a Volvo distribution hybrid truck with an extended full-
electric range from 10 km to 30 km, improving the performance of batteries in terms of power and 
energy density as well as cost-enabling vehicle platforms with increased energy storage that facilitate 
further  electric  range,  and  sizing  the  internal  combustion  engine  towards  more  average  operation 
rather than the peak-power vehicle requirement benefits fuel efficiency and emission reduction. The 
vehicle  was  equipped  with  innovative  plug-in  hybrid  electric  vehicle  (PHEV)  rechargeable  energy 
storage (RES) systems, designed specifically for vehicle application. It featured an improved range for 
operation in low-emission zones using advanced control systems. 

ASSURED 

57 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/724087  

58 https://h2020-orca.eu/  

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Assured aimed at boosting the electrification of urban commercial vehicles and their integration with 
high-power fast-charging infrastructure and evaluating several infrastructures in different cities across 
Europe59. The project was ongoing between 2017 – 2022 and included 39 partners from 12 different 
EU Member States.  

The  main  goal  was  to  charge  different  vehicles  using  the  same  infrastructure,  making  ASSURED 
innovative in this approach since this would be the first time a project set out to test the interoperability 
of  the  charging  solutions  applied.  If  successful,  this  would  help  reduce  costs  and  support  the 
standardisation of the elements of the infrastructure. Assured tested six public transport buses, two 
garbage  trucks,  one  delivery  truck,  and  one  light  commercial  delivery  vehicle  with  automatic  fast 
charging, which meant that there was no human interaction during the charging process. The charging 
solutions tested by the project included different types of pantographs, plug-ins and wireless charging.  

Some of the main results of the project were i) better understanding of the effects on battery ageing 
and  lifetime  due  to  fast  charging,  ii)  effects  on  electric  grids  due  to  the  installation  of  high-power 
chargers  (up  to  600  kW),  iii)  a  common  standard,  laying  out  the  guidelines  for  the  interoperable 
operation of HD vehicles with chargers, iv) test results from interoperability, v) results from use cases 
and demonstrations of the vehicles in cities, and vi) a simulation tool to complement all the above, 
basically a virtual platform for anyone wanting to use the ASSURED solution. 

CONVENIENT 

Within  the  CONVENIENT  project  a  suite  of  innovative  energy-saving  solutions  were  developed  to 
achieve a 30% reduction target regarding the fuel consumption of long-haul heavy duty trucks60. Three 
major EU truck manufacturers (IVECO, VOLVO and DAF) built 3 trucks, together with 19 project partners 
(research  and  suppliers).  The  aim  was  to  demonstrate  and  validate  the  fuel-saving  capabilities  of 
technologies like: hybrid transmission, electrified auxiliaries, aerodynamics61, photovoltaic solar roof 
for truck and semitrailer and more. 

Current European projects  

NextEtruck  

The NextEtruck project aims to play a pioneering role in the decarbonisation of vehicle fleets, with the 
focus on medium-duty trucks, and accelerating sustainable market replenishment, by bringing zero-
electric medium freight haulage into practice. Some of the main objectives are: 10% improvement of 
overall efficiency, efficient sizing of the components based on the use case by using a digital twin, fast 
charging and fleet integration of the zero-emission trucks. 

Again,  lowering  emissions  is  one  of  the  main  reasons  for  this  project.  Medium-duty  trucks  are 
responsible for about 25% of transport industry emissions and in Europe a fleet of 1.1 million medium-
duty trucks is present. So changing this segment of vehicles to zero-emission can have a substantial 
impact on emissions. 

pilot 

Three 
cities: 
Istanbul (Turkey), Utrecht (Netherlands), and Barcelona (Spain). Two electric trucks (built by TVV and 
Ford OTOSAN) and one electric refuse truck (build by IRIZAR) will be demonstrated. The DC chargers 

sites  will 

developed 

project, 

three 

the 

be 

in 

in 

59 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/769850 
60 https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/312314/reporting 
61 https://www.2zeroemission.eu/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/04-CONVENIENT-IVECO.pdf  

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

will  be  provided  by  JEMA  and  ABB  (Panion).  Overall  a  driving  range  of  at  least  200  km  will  be 
demonstrated. 

The refuse truck will be demonstrated in Barcelona. Electric vehicles can help to protect the historic 
city centre. The impact on noise will be assessed. 

In  Istanbul,  a  truck  from  Ford  OTOSAN  will  be  demonstrated  for  six  months on  urban  and  intercity 
roads. The pilot will address, among other things, tailored eco-routing strategies with real-time mission, 
load and charging planning.  
The last demonstration will be done in Utrecht. From 2025 Utrecht will have a Low Emission Zone and 
only  zero-emission  trucks  will  be  allowed  to  enter  the  city  to  deliver  goods.  Therefore,  the 
demonstration will give insights in how it can be done 

The project is ongoing and the demonstrations will start in 2025.    

H2Accelerate  

H2Accelerate is a Horizon2020 project that aims to deploy hydrogen trucks with fuel cell technology 
and the related fuelling infrastructure  at large scale in Europe62.  The consortium exists of hydrogen 
infrastructure players (Linde, OMV, Shell and Total Energies) and truck manufacturers (Daimler truck, 
IVECO and VOLVO). The first phase will be the deployment of 150 trucks in Europe and more than 20 
high capacity HRS. The roll-out will be done at carefully selected locations and clusters.  The second 
phase will focus on the coverage of the major European corridors, reaching volume manufacturing of 
more than thousand trucks yearly. 

Projects selected under HORIZON-CL5-2022-D5-01-08   
Modular multi-powertrain zero-emission systems for HDV (BEV and FCEV) for efficient and economic 
operation (2ZERO) 

Three  projects  were  selected  under  this  call:  ESCALATE,  EMPOWER  and  ZEFES.  They  all  focus  on 
technical  objectives  like  scalable,  modular  powertrains,  improved  efficiency  of  the  energy/thermal 
management, a load capacity of not less than 90%, improved fuel cell operations… In combination with 
the  development  of  tools  to  integrate  the  ZERO-EMISSION  TRUCKS  in  existing  fleet,  digital  twin 
development and scenarios to achieve price reduction resulting from economies of scale. All projects 
are part of the AEVETO cluster. The project call can be found online63.  

ESCALATE  

The ESCALATE project aims to demonstrate zero-emission long-haul applications with a driving range 
of more than 800 km without refuelling or recharging. A daily operation that covers at least 500 km is 
targeted64.  

The three targeted innovation areas are:  

▪ 

Standardized well-designed, cost effective modular and scalable multi-powertrain 
components; 

62 https://h2accelerate.eu/ 

63 https://cordis.europa.eu/programme/id/HORIZON_HORIZON-CL5-2022-D5-01-08/en 

64 https://www.escalate-eu.com/ 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Fast Fuelling & Grid-friendly charging solutions; and 

▪ 
▪  Digital Twin (DT) & AI-based management tools considering capacity, availability, speed, and 

nature of the charging infrastructures as well as the fleet structures 

The ultimate goals is to develop a business model for three types of zero-emission trucks with 
innovative modular building blocks. 

Five pilots, five digital twins and five TCO case studies will be conducted during the project. Special 
attention will be given to the environmental impact via the project TranSensusLCA. The pilots will 
demonstrate regional and cross-border logistics during a 24 month demonstration under real-world 
conditions and more than 500 000 km will be driven. 

The project will also showcase 3 pioneering infrastructure pilots: a mobile HRS, a green-fix multi-fuel 
station and a 1 MW fast charger65. 

EMPOWER 

The objective of the EMPOWER project is to deliver two modular zero-emission trucks, with a GVW of 
at least 40 tons for the truck-trailer combinations66. Two demonstrations will be done with a FCE-HDV 
(range  of  750  km  unfuelled)  and  BE-HDV  (400  km  uncharged)  from  IVECO.  The  vehicles  will  be 
demonstrated in 5 long-haul and regional distribution use-cases, including cross-border corridors.  

Other innovations will be a highly reliable fuel cell system, optimised thermal and energy management, 
digital twin models of the demonstrations, fleet management systems and optimised routing. 

ZEFES  

During ZEFES 9 long-haul truck configuration (3 BEV and 6 FCEV) will be deployed in various use cases 
covering  important  TEN-T  corridors  in  Europe67.  In  addition,  innovations  in  trailers  and  megawatt 
charging systems will be demonstrated. The demonstrations also include multi-modal, cross-border use 
cases  and  in  total  more  than  2  million  kilometres  will  be  driven.  The  vehicle  combinations  will  be 
demonstrated in 15 use case, for at least 6 months per use case. Daily routes up to 1300 km will be 
showcased together with a digital twin and fleet integration tools. A description of all the use cases and 
the truck trailer combinations can be found on the project website68. The uses cases will be done from 
the  north  of  Europe,  to  the  south.  In  Sweden/Norway  a  VOLVO  hydrogen  fuel  cell  truck  will  be 
demonstrated,  to  check  if  fuel  cell  technology  is  less  restricted  than  battery  technology  in  a  cold 
environment. The other hydrogen trucks will be demonstrated in the Alpine region and in an use case 
in Spain where the technology will be directly compared to battery electric. We expect that in Spain, 
both technologies will be pushed to their limits. Since both technologies will be pushed to their limits 
in warm weather conditions (cooling of batteries and lower gas density at higher temperatures). 

65 https://www.etp-logistics.eu/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/1-ESCALATE-Transport-and-Logistic-Fair-11-May-2023.pdf 

66 https://www.ait.ac.at/en/news-events/single-view/detail/7610?cHash=36ff38b1736d0e1e681f20646748f2eb 

67 https://zefes.eu/ 
68 https://zefes.eu/wp-content/uploads/sites/9/2023/06/ZEFES_D1.2-NeedsRequirements_PUB_FINAL_website_.pdf 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       33 

 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

3.4  Market practices: emission reporting  

Currently, in the market there are two important standards that have been produced, relevant to the 
logistics sector. The ISO 14083:2022 “Greenhouse gases — Quantification and reporting of greenhouse 
gas  emissions  arising  from  transport chain  operations”  provides  a  general  framework  for  emissions 
calculations. Since it was only launched March 2023, much of the industry is ‘practically’ only using the 
industry standard GLEC Framework (2019) “Global Logistics Emissions Council Framework for Logistics 
Emissions  Accounting  and  Reporting.  Version  2.0”,  although  there  are  not  significant  differences 
between both standards. The second important formal standard that is the upcoming EN 17837:2023 
“Postal  Services  -  Parcel  Delivery  Environmental  Footprint  -  Methodology  for  calculation  and 
declaration of GHG emissions and air pollutants of parcel logistics delivery services”69, which can be 
understood as the application of the ISO 14083 to the distribution of goods in a parcel delivery service, 
“namely the collection and delivery rounds, the trunking and the operations due to processing and the 
physical handling of parcels”.  

Both  of  these  standards  are  currently  not  mandatory  to  be  adopted  in  internal  calculation  or  for 
reporting purposes. The are aligned with the GHG Protocol, which is in turn used in the industry for 
sustainability reporting, submission to Science Based Targets, or Carbon Disclosure Project. However, 
the CountEmissionsEU proposal has adopted the CEN ISO 14083 (which is the ISO 14083 transposed to 
the  European  Committee  for  Standardization)  as  the  standard  to  be  used  for  transport  emissions 
calculations  for  the  instances  applicable  under  the  proposed  legislation.  The  applicability  of  the 
proposed legislation is under a “binding opt-in” system, i.e., only for those that calculate and disclose 
GHG emissions data of transport services. In other words, if the data is not disclosed, the company does 
not need to use this. Other aspects have been included in the proposal, including management and 
verification of fuel emission factor and emission intensity data by the European Environment Agency 
(EEA), as well as other rules on communication and transparency, the use of certified calculation tools 
and the assurance  scheme. The  legislation strengthens the impact that the ISO 14083 standard can 
bring  to  the  industry  and  climate  change  goals  by  enforcing  the  uniformity  and  increasing  the 
trustworthiness of the emissions disclosure. Other regulations that are soon to be passed or come into 
effect that may use this framework are the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD), the SEC 
proposal for scope 3 emissions, and the Streamlined Energy and Carbon Reporting (SECR), and even 
proposals  for  Unfair  Commercial  Practices  Directive  (UCPD).  This  is  to  increase  the  prominence  of 
climate impact and risks in the financial sector, as well as to reduce greenwashing practices. This could 
see a large number of organizations being required to use the calculation framework to fulfill different 
legislative requirements in the coming years. For instance, the expected number of companies that the 
CSRD will initially apply to are 49,000 large or listed companies in the EU70. SMEs will also eventually 
fall  under  CSRD  requirements.  While only  some  of  the  companies will  be  required  to  disclose  their 
freight  transport  emissions,  this  will  nevertheless  be  a  significant  increase  in organizations  that  will 
apply the calculation framework. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  just  like  the  standard  for  the  parcel  sector,  different  sectors,  whether 
differentiated  by  transport  or  economic  activity  have  found  the  need  to  develop  supplementary 
guidance (or industry standards) specific to their use case. These methodologies are aligned with the 
GLEC Framework. Some examples include the Clean Cargo methods71, Calculating GHG transport and 

69 https://standards.iteh.ai/catalog/standards/cen/1ecb279f-4529-486b-9342-fb4d463ee666/pren-17837 
70 https://www.bsr.org/en/blog/what-business-needs-to-know-eu-corporate-sustainability-reporting-directive 
71 https://www.smartfreightcentre.org/en/skills/library/clean-cargo-emissions-calculation-method/ 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       34 

 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

logistics  emissions  for  the  European  Chemical  Industry72,  and  Ro-Ro  GHG  Emissions  Accounting 
Guidance73.  These  are  voluntarily  adopted  within  a  certain  sector  as  pushed  by  the  relevant  trade 
association. The bodies that regulate and are very influential in the aviation and maritime sector are 
also adopting calculation methods that align well with the GLEC Framework. These are global initiatives 
that have the potential to expand the scope of application around the world. 

Another trend in this space is the need for a standardized emissions accounting system to enable an 
emerging  lever of  transport  decarbonization,  that  is the  book-and-claim  of  low  emissions  transport 
solutions. The idea behind this is that a company would like to pay for the right to claim lower emissions 
in their emissions disclosures than is actually carried out within their transport chain, especially that 
which  falls  under  their  Scope  3  operations.  Depending  on  the  type  of  system,  the  lower  emissions 
profile  could  be  taken  from  a  fuel  provider  or  a  carrier  carrying  out  the  low  emission  transport 
operation. In each case, the emissions profile associated with the fuel or operation is separated from 
the actual physical fuel or operations, and is sold to a buyer. This is an emerging practice,  which is 
offered by a couple of carriers and fuel suppliers.  

3rd party marketplaces and tools to support this type of transaction, typically called carbon insets, are 
cropping  up  and  provide  services  to  verify  and  book  the  claims  (e.g.  CarbonLeap  and  123Carbon). 
However, to enable a transparent transaction, i.e., to avoid double counting, and to provide an accurate 
estimation of the amount of low emission transport ‘credits’ that can be claimed, a fair and transparent 
emissions calculation framework will need to be adopted by all parties involved. These typically would 
follow the calculation methods used in the GLEC Framework. 

While the ISO 14083 standard has been released, there has been movement to also ensure that other 
countries  and  continents  are  enabled  to  use  them.  SFC  China  will  be  launching  a  GLEC  Framework 
specifically for implementation in China. Similar initiatives are being launched by SFC in India and East 
Africa.  While  the  groundwork  of  defining  energy  emission  factors  and  emission  intensities  that 
represent the region’s transport operations still needs to be done, what is hopeful is that the awareness 
of the importance of carrying this out is growing globally.  

https://cefic.org/media-corner/newsroom/updated-guidance-available-to-support-the-chemical-sector-further-reduce-

72 
its-environmental-impact-of-freight-transportation/ 
73 
ecg-publish-the-first-ever-methodology-harmonizing-emissions-accounting-in-the-ro-ro-segment/ 

https://www.smartfreightcentre.org/en/about-sfc/news/driving-decarbonization-in-shipping-smart-freight-centre-and-

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       35 

 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

A book and claim chain of custody model (Smart Freight Centre, 2023) 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Table 4 Summary of market status 

Current 

Short term 

Medium to long term 

ISO14083,  GLEC  v2  (voluntary 
for sustainability reporting and 
target setting.)  

proposal 
CountEmissionsEU 
adopts CEN ISO 14083 (binding 
opt-in) 

Other  regulations  CSRD,  SEC 
Scope 3 emission, SECR, UCPD 
likely to adopt.  

EN 17837 launched end 2023. 

CSRD:  now 
companies --> SMEs 

large/listed  EU 

More sectoral guidance as driven by industry.  

Regional guidance driven by different markets (China, India, East 
Africa). 

Book and Claim framework adoption (uncertain) 

Sectoral guidance and defaults 
aligned  with  standards  (Clean 
Cargo 
GHG 
methods, 
emissions  calculations  for  the 
European  Chemical  Industry, 
and  Ro-Ro  GHG  Emissions 
Accounting Guidance) 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

4  Projects to improve Efficient and Zero-emission logistics  

4.1 

Identification and selection of relevant R&I projects  

The selection of projects was performed within a three-step project mapping (see Figure 3). The aim of 
this exercise was to identify those R&I projects that shall be incorporated into the subsequent work 
steps of this Cloud Report. In practical terms, the almost 300 projects of the overall R&I project list were 
filtered according to following criteria: 

•  Step  1  (initial  mapping):  the  titles  and  other  entries  of  the  project  list  were  screened  for 
logistics“, 
relevant  keywords  and  classifications,  such  as  “zero-emission“,  “efficient 
“aerodynamics“, “transport emissions“ or “load efficiency“. Additionally, the summaries of the 
projects  were  checked  for  these  keywords.  In  total,  16  projects  have  been  identified  to  be 
tackled within the next step. Sources used were CORDIS, TRIMIS and the project’s website, if 
still existing. 

•  Step  2  (relevance  mapping):  all  projects  of  the  R&I  project  list  had  received  a  relevance 
assessment  (“high”,  “medium”,  “low”),  referring  to  the  general  significance  for  the  Cloud 
Reports. Basically, only projects with “high” relevance were further considered. After this work 
step, 11 projects remained. 

•  Step 3 (content mapping): in the final step, the content of the 8 projects was analysed in detail. 

More specifically, the project documentations were checked regarding 

o  Compliance with the identified action areas and expected impacts (see Table 1); 
o  Consideration  in  one  of  the  other  Cloud  Reports.  Generally,  this  was  no  exclusion 
criterion; however, it should be ensured that the projects were properly allocated to 
the Cloud Reports according to their content focus 

As a result, the mapping exercise led to the identification of 8 projects relevant for this Cloud Report 
(see Table 5). The characteristics of efficient transport also imply a high likeliness of overlapping with 
projects  and  specific  outcomes  tackled  by  other  Cloud  Reports  (Urban  mobility,  Physical  internet, 
logistics networks…). Also, the strict scope of this Cloud Report led a lower number of selected projects, 
since only project with demonstration are selected. In addition, project on zero-emission trucks are just 
starting  and  are  therefore  not  selected.  Therefore,  the  low  number  of  identified  projects  is 
understandable and plausible.  

4.2  Overview on the selected projects 

A visualisation of the projects is given in Figure 7. Three projects of the 7th European Framework were 
selected, two on efficient and zero-emission transport and one on emission reporting. UDRIVE focus on 
naturalistic  driving  behaviour,  which  can  be  used  as  an  input  for  eco-driving.  TRANSFORMERS 
demonstrated trailer  innovations, for both loading efficiency and electric drive train.  In COFRET  the 
GLEC  framework  (methodology  to  calculate  the  greenhouse  gas  emissions  from  freight  transport 
activity) was developed. 

Five projects of Horizon 2020 were selected, four on efficient and zero-emission transport and one on 
emission reporting. AEROFLEX is the successor of TRANSFORMERS and focussed on the efficiency gains 
by aerodynamic adaptations. ENSEMBLE demonstrated multibrand platooning and Modales focussed 
on eco-driving. H2Haul is the only selected project that is still ongoing. It will demonstrate 16 fuel cell 
electric trucks at the related fuelling infrastructure. LEARN is the successor of COFRET and wanted to 
test  the  GLEC  framework  in  real  life  and  elevate  it  from  an  industry  standard  to  an  international 
standard. 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       38 

 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

More detailed project descriptions can be found in Section 4.4. 

Table 5: Overview of the selected projects, the related program, coordinator and period. 

Acronym 

UDRIVE 

Name on CORDIS web page 

Program 

Coordinator 

Period 

eUropean naturalistic Driving and Riding for 
Infrastructure  &  Vehicle 
safety  and 
Environment 

FP7-SST-2012-
RTD-1 

STICHTING 
ONDERZOEK 
(SWOV) 

WETENSCHAPPELIJK 
VERKEERSVEILIGHEID 

10/2012-
06/2017 

TRANSFORMERS 

Configurable  and  Adaptable  Trucks  and 
Trailers for Optimal Transport Efficiency 

FP7-SST-2013-
RTD-1 

VOLVO TECHNOLOGY AB 

AEROFLEX 

ENSEMBLE 

Aerodynamic  and  Flexible  Trucks  for  Next 
Generation of Long Distance Road Transport 

H2020-GV-2017   MAN TRUCK & BUS SE 

ENabling  SafE  Multi-Brand  pLatooning  for 
Europe 

H2020-ART-
2016-2017 

NEDERLANDSE  ORGANISATIE  VOOR 
TOEGEPAST 
NATUURWETENSCHAPPELIJK 
ONDERZOEK (TNO) 

ROAD 

TRANSPORT 
EUROPEAN 
IMPLEMENTATION 
TELEMATICS 
COORDINATION  ORGANISATION 
- 
INTELLIGENT  TRANSPORT  SYSTEMS  & 
SERVICES EUROPE 

ELEMENT ENERGY LIMITED 

09/2013-
08/2017 

10/2017-
09/2021 

06/2018-
03/2022 

09/2019-
05/2023 

02/2019-
01/2024 

MODALES 

MOdify  Drivers’  behaviour  to  Adapt  for 
Lower EmissionS 

H2020-MG-
2018-2019-2020 

H2Haul 

Hydrogen  fuel  cell  trucks  for  heavy-duty, 
zero emission logistics 

H2020-JTI-FCH-
2018-1 

COFRET 

Carbon footprint of freight transport 

FP7-SST-2010-
RTD-1 

DEUTSCHES  ZENTRUM  FUR  LUFT- 
UND RAUMFAHRT EV (DLR) 

06/2011-
11/2014 

LEARN 

Logistics 
Emission 
Reduction Network 

Accounting 

and 

H2020-MG-
2016-2017 

STICHTING  SMART  FREIGHT  CENTRE 
(SFC) 

10/2016-
03/2019 

Eight  projects  were  selected,  6  regarding  Efficient  and  zero-emission 
freight transport and 2 regarding emission reporting. 

Project results and outcomes must of course also be mirrored against the received funding, since this 
consists of public money. In this respect, (R&I) projects are obliged to return adequate benefits to the 
society  that  feeds  them.  The  8  selected  projects  consumed  more  than  63  million  EUR  of  funding 
altogether.  

In a next step, the organisations with the highest level of involvement in the selected 8 projects were 
identified.  The  main  criteria  were  frequency  of  participation  in  the  projects  as  well  as  their  role  as 
provider  of  substantial  results  or  as  a  project  coordinator.  These  organisations  are  important  for 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

understanding and monitoring projects’ outcomes as well as the implementation cases derived from 
them. Specifically, they form the basis for the selection of the interview partners. As Figure 8 visualises, 
12 organisations were revealed as particularly involved in European research projects in the area of 
‘Monitoring and implementing Efficient and zero-emission freight transport’. Most of them are truck 
or trailer manufacturers, research institutes or associations. 

We  want  to  stress  out  that  many  more  project  partners  contribute  to  the  project  results.  The 
implementation  of  innovations  in  logistics  is  difficult,  since  the  whole  value  chain  (shipper,  carrier, 
OEMs, suppliers, authorities, infrastructure…) is strongly interlinked. Innovations by one stakeholder 
group affects the other. One example for this is the transition to zero-emission trucks. To achieve this, 
all stakeholders will need to adjust their operations profoundly and it can only be a success when the 
stakeholders communicate and work together. 

It was identified that projects benefit from a strong advisory board/stakeholder group with members 
from the full logistics value chain. We therefore want to address that mapping only funded partners, 
does  not  give  a  complete  picture  of  the  stakeholders  that  contributed  to  the  project.  Unfunded 
stakeholder group members should get recognition for their contributions to R&I project. 

Especially,  truck  end-users  (carriers)  and  shippers  are  underrepresented  as  partner  in  the  assessed, 
finished R&I projects. In all finished project, P&G was the only funded shipper. Luckily, we see a change 
in the newly started projects, were shippers and truck end-users are funded partners. 

  Overview of the main stakeholder groups in European R&I projects and the involved 
companies. We want to stress the importance of strong advisory boards or stakeholder 
group involvement. Unfunded partners can impact the project significantly and their 
contribution should be acknowledged more. 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

4.3  Expected impacts of the selected projects 

In the Table 6 the expected impacts for Table 6 are repeated together with related KPIs and the projects 
who worked on the topic. 

Table 6 Expected impacts of the selected projects 

Expected impacts  

KPIs 

Decreased  environmental  impact  (including,  reduction of 
noise) 

GHG emissions/Unit of transport 

Energy consumption/Unit of transport 

Improved capacity utilisation of barge, train and truck 

Increase the load capacity of trailers 

Decreased cost of transport & overall logistics 

Decrease the fuel consumption 

Projects 

TRANSFORMERS, 
AEROFLEX, H2Haul 

TRANSFORMERS, 
AEROFLEX 

TRANSFORMERS, 
AEROFLEX, 
Modales 

UDRIVE, 

Improve energy consumption 

Less driver costs 

ENSEMBLE 

Electrify the drive train 

Regenerative technology 

TRANSFORMERS, 
AEROFLEX 

Increase transport efficiency 

Compatibility  with  high  capacity  vehicles 
and other transport modes 

TRANSFORMERS, 
AEROFLEX, ENSEMBLE 

Data quality and communication 

Connected, cooperative vehicles,  

ENSEMBLE 

V2X, infrastructure 

H2Haul 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

4.4  Description of the selected projects 

UDRIVE 

The UDRIVE project aimed to increase the understanding of road user behaviour by systematically studying 
road user behaviour in real-life conditions. The project was funded by FP7, between 2012 and 2017, with a 
consortium consisting of 19 partners, representing a good balance between different EU regions, and between 
expertise  in  the  various  research  areas.  UDRIVE  focused  on  two  aspects:  the  identification  of  relevant 
measures  to  improve  road  safety, and  on  the  identification of  promising  approaches  for  reducing  harmful 
emissions and fuel consumption to make road traffic more sustainable. The project conducted a large-scale 
naturalistic driving study, with participants using their own vehicles, allowing them to drive their cars, trucks 
and scooters naturally. The project used a specially designed data acquisition system connected to seven or 
eight  unobtrusive  cameras  installed  throughout  the  vehicle.  Each  vehicle  was  also  equipped  with  a  smart 
camera capable of automatically identifying nearby objects, such as cars, trucks and pedestrians. 

UDRIVE generated several types of results including technical developments, the UDRIVE database and new 
behavioural  insights.  The  results  relevant  to  the  cloud  report  were  mainly  related  to  eco-driving  with  the 
analysis showcasing velocity distributions across drivers and speed limits, the effect of driving styles on eco-
driving  and  the  potential  effects  of  eco-driving.  One  of  the  insights  was  that  the  analysis  reinforced  the 
conclusion that energy is being wasted by drivers in the approach to and passage through curves by lack of 
anticipation of the need to slow down and therefore by over-harsh deceleration. Behaviours regarding gear-
changing,  braking  and  speed  choice  were  especially  relevant  as  drivers  showed  large  variations  in  those 
behaviours  with  associated  substantial  variations  in  CO2  emissions.  Recommendations  for  new  measures 
include enforcement of speed limits with the aim to reduce energy use, regulating the use of in-vehicle systems 
that  contribute  to eco-driving,  further  awareness  campaigns  promoting the  use  of vehicles  with  gear  shift 
indicators and automatic engine shutdown systems, promoting driving in the highest gear, and giving feedback 
to drivers about their eco-driving ‘scores’. Another category of measures is the design of road infrastructure 
that supports eco-driving (e.g., grade-separated intersections, improved network design, improved traffic light 
algorithms including communication with vehicles). Traffic management strategies can be adapted to achieve 
smoother  driving  (less  stop-and-go  traffic).  And  in  the  longer  term,  automation  of  the  driving  task  offers 
possibilities for programming the vehicles to drive eco-friendly. 

TRANSFORMERS 

Within the TRANSFORMERS project the aim was to reduce the energy consumption with 25% per tonne.km 
goods transported in real world scenarios, to achieve this, the project assessed four innovations: 

a trailer designed for increased load capacity 

- 
-  mission planning and adaptation to allow an optimised journey for each vehicle combination 
- 
- 

a vehicle that can transform to achieve improved aerodynamics based on the mission 
‘Hybrid-on-Demand’ (HoD) electric driveline 

In total 13 project partners have worked together to apply a holistic view on aerodynamics improvements of 
the  tractor-trailer  combination.  Since  a  trailer  is  not  always  filled  to  the  brim  with  goods  (mass  limited 
missions, goods that  cannot  be  stacked…), a trailer could change shape  and alter the volume available for 
payload without compromising its loading efficiency. The trailer changes include curved front bulk head, side 
skirts, boat tail and 4-segments lowerable roof (See figure 9).  

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       42 

 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

The adjustments in trailer design implemented the TRANSFORMER 

project 

The demonstrator test results showed that the Hybrid-on-Demand system could result in a fuel consumption 
(%/ton∙km)  reduction  of  3  to  5%,  and  even  more  in  urban  heavy  traffic  and  steep  elevation  changes.  The 
aerodynamic features could result in a 14% drag reduction (at 90km/h constant speed), which relate to fuel 
reduction of 8%. During the product a reduction of 6.5% was demonstrated, without optimised side skirts and 
bulkhead, so the 8% should be feasible.  The improvements in loading efficiency can have the biggest impact. 
The use of a double floor, could lead to 10 extra pallets  increase, which with the project assumption of an 
original cargo payload of 15 tonnes, leads to an energy use reduction up to 17% per t.km.  
When all TRANSFORMERS innovations are combined, a reduction in energy use per t.km of goods transported 
of more than 25% can be achieved for almost all mission profiles at average payload (15t). 

AEROFLEX 

The goal of AEROFLEX was to optimize future freight transport and multimodal transport chains, to lower the 
emissions an increase the transport efficiency74. Therefore flexible and adaptable vehicles and loading unites 
with optimized aerodynamics were developed. Together with a ‘hybrid’ power  train (ICE engine and electrified 
powertrain in trailer).  In addition, intelligent access policies, efficient use of road infrastructure  and safety 
systems were investigated. 

The main objectives were: 

improved safety, comfort, cost efficiency and multimodal transport   

-  Characterize the European freight transport market for 2040  
-  develop new concepts and technologies resulting in adaptable trucks with a reduced drag,   
- 
-  demonstrate potential of truck aerodynamics and energy management improvements   
- 
-  drafting of recommendations for revising standards and legislative frameworks to allow the new 

associated impact assessments   

aerodynamic and flexible vehicle concepts on the road   
achieve an efficiency improvement up to 33 % in long haulage road transport. 

- 

74 https://aeroflex-project.eu/ 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

The outcomes of the project were: i) the result of the future market study, ii) the demonstration of two EMS 
combinations,  of  which  one  is  focussing  on  efficiency  improvement  (advanced  energy  management 
powertrain, AEMPT) and the other on aerodynamic improvements (aerodynamic features for the complete 
vehicle (AFCV), iii) an electric, remote controlled dolly, iv) demonstration of multimodal.   

The project consisted out of two demonstrators, both EMS combinations. The first combination was a EMS 1 
(60t) combination, a 6x2 rigid truck combined with a e-dolly (Smart Power Dolly) (and a semitrailer (originally 
developed in the TRANSFORMERS project). The demonstrator vehicle and a reference vehicle were subject to 
various on-road tests to demonstrate, validate and analyse the potential of the AEMPT concept to save fuel 
and decrease CO2 emissions under real-world conditions. When the fuel consumption, expressed in both L/km 
and L/t∙km, was compared between the EMS1 combination with and without AEMPT a significant fuel usage 
reduction was found. The absolute value of the reduction was related to the use case, however reductions 
between 2% and 10% were found on a L/km basis.  

The second demonstrator was a EMS 2 combination, a 4x2 tractor-semitrailer –dolly – semitrailer (from the 
TRANSFORMER  project).  This  combination  was  demonstrated  with  and  without  aerodynamic  features. 
Simulations and wind tunnel tests showed that a reduction in drag of 17 to 27% could be expected.  

Other  innovations  that  were  demonstrated  were  Smart  Loading  Units  (SLU),  smart  power  dolly  (remote 
controlled) that can help manoeuvre EMS trailers. 

The main conclusion for AEROFLEX was that EMS is a positive evolution for both the transport efficiency as 
the for emission reduction. EMS is compatible with other transport modes. 

ENSEMBLE 

ENSEMBLE  demonstrated  ‘multi-brand’  platooning  to  improve  fuel  economy,  traffic  safety  and  transport 
capacity. A platoon of seven trucks from different brands has been demonstrated under real life conditions, 
across national borders. The project started in 2018 and lasted for 4 years. The main technical outcomes of 
the project are collaborative AEBS system and the demonstration of multi-brand platooning.  The ENSEMBLE 
project led to ISO/DIS 4272 Truck platooning systems (TPS).  

In the first year of ENSEMBLE, acceptance criteria, a reference and the specifications were determined. During 
the second and third year, the reference designs was implemented on the trucks and an impact assessment 
was made for several criteria. Finally, in the last year, the multi-brand platoons were tested on a test track and 
on international public roads. 

Platoons are small truck convoys, that are partly automated. Commonly, the first truck has a driver, while the 
other truck are driverless and follow the first truck (see figure 10). The potential of platooning can be huge, 
since  around 14% of the total distance  driven by trucks could be part of a platoon. Nevertheless, highway 
entrances and exits and inserting of another truck within in the platoon can impact and limit the applicability 
of platooning. Platooning could have beneficial results on traffic flow, however there was no clear positive 
impact found on fuel consumption and emissions and for other road users. 

Overall, the investments related to make a truck platoon-ready was found to be less that 5k€ or less, and cost 
savings where on average about 3% or more, indicating that there could be a market. However, due to an 
inept road network configuration and a short life cycle of a commercial truck, the market uptake is almost 
none. In addition, (international) regulation is missing for platoon service providers. 

Platooning is a promising concept, nevertheless due to technical and regulatory limits it is not applied yet. The 
further  development  and  integration  of  platooning  is  now  seen  as  a  part  of  Cooperative,  Connected  and 
Automated Mobility (CCAM). 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       44 

 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

The multi-brand platoon with seven trucks demonstrated during the ENSEMBLE 
project 

MODALES 

Modales was developed to substantially reduce air pollution from all types of on-road vehicles by encouraging 
the adoption of low-emission driving behavior and proper maintenance choice. The project ran from 2019 to 
2023  and  included  16  partners,  from  10  European  countries  and  2  international  partners,  representing 
research institutes and universities, vehicle component manufacturers, ITS- and road transport sector, legal 
and policy consultants etc.  

 The aim of Modales was to: 
(1) Understand the nature of driving behaviour with respect to vehicle emissions, by validating variables for 
driver behaviour and their variability (e.g. speed, road condition etc),  
(2)  Correlate  driving  behaviour  variability  with  real  powertrain,  brake  and  tyre  emissions,  by  developing 
mathematical equations defining powertrain, brake and tyre emissions as a function of driving behaviour,  
(3) Propose and validate real-time driver assistance smartphone app for low emission driving,  
(4) Promote low-emission oriented driving via training courses and an awareness campaign 
(5) Assess the real effectiveness of on-board diagnostics (OBD) and technical inspections and investigate the 
legal situation of tampering in Europe, and  
(6) Assess the potential impact of diesel retrofits.  

Results from Modales that are relevant to the Cloud report topic are mainly connected to gaining knowledge 
on eco-driving, and training drivers to drive more eco-friendly.  

COFRET 

The aim of COFRET was to develop methodologies and tools to calculate the greenhouse gas emissions from 
freight transport activity. One of the main objectives was to ensure that the methods would be used by the 
industry,  hence  during  the  grant  agreement  stage,  after  the  project  was  formally  awarded  the  grant,  the 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Project  Officer  (PO)  from  DG  MOVE,  requested  that  an  Industry  Advisory  Board  (IAB)  be  included  and 
integrated into the project.  

An important outcome of including the IAB in the project was that early in the project, after the work package 
that reviewed the state-of-the-practice, the IAB requested that the scope of the project be changed. The main 
reason was that the IAB identified the real implementation barrier was the lack of standardisation of in the 
market. The different methods and tools, such as Smartway, from ADEME, and the European EN 16258, were 
used for different reasons by different actors. One single standard that harmonized the different approaches 
was needed, rather than an additional method and tool.  

After  negotiation  between  the  partners,  the  IAB  and  the  PO,  the  scope  of  COFRET  was  changed  towards 
standardising the methodology for calculating GHG emissions in freight transport.  

The main results, the COFRET methodology, led to what is now commonly referred to as the GLEC Framework, 
which is the harmonized methodology for calculating emissions from freight transport chain.  

Project Deliverables: 

•  Existing methods and tools for calculation of carbon footprint of transport and logistics, Deliverable D 
2.1, COFRET project (Carbon Footprint of Freight Transport), Auvinen, H., Mäkelä, K., Lischke, A., 
Burmeister, A., de Ree, D., Ton, J., 2011 

•  Methodologies for emission calculations — Best practices, implications and future needs, Deliverable D 
2.4, COFRET project (Carbon Footprint of Freight Transport), Auvinen, H., Mäkelä, K., Gjerde Johansen, 
B., Ruesch, M., 2012 

•  Assessment and typology of existing CO2 calculation tools and methodologies, Deliverable D 3.1, COFRET 
project (Carbon Footprint of Freight Transport), de Ree, D., Ton, J., Davydenko, I., Chen, M., Kiel, J., 
Auvinen, H., Mäkelä, K., 2012 

•  Gap analysis, Deliverable D 3.2, COFRET project (Carbon Footprint of Freight Transport), Kiel, J., Auvinen, 

H., Bohne, S., Davydenko, I., Diekmann, D., Krietsch, F., 2014 

•  Suggestions and recommendations towards global harmonisation of carbon footprint calculation 

principles and comparable reporting, Deliverable D 3.3, COFRET project (Carbon Footprint of Freight 
Transport), Davydenko, I., Tavasszy, L., Ehrler, V., Lewis, A., 2014 

For further exploitation, the International Workshop Agreement75 proposing the harmonized methodology 
was also issued.  

At the  last months of the COFRET  project  the Smart Freight  Centre (SFC)  was founded by Sophie Punte in 
Amsterdam.  The  aim  of  the  organization  was  to  establish  an  organization  focused  on  reducing  freight 
emissions  at  a  global  level,  in  collaboration  with  more  regional  or  national  green  freight  programs.    The 
coordinator  and  several  leading  partners  of  the  COFRET  consortium,  and  the  IAB  together  with  the  PO 
discussed the possibility of using SFC in its post-project exploitation, namely by housing the GLEC methodology 
and the IAB. When this happened, SFC took on the role of promoting the GLEC methodology and developing 
it further, while the COFRET IAB became the founding members of the GLEC Advisory Council  – composed 
entirely of members in the logistics industry.  

The end of COFRET marked the start of the global standardization of freight transport emissions calculation 
led by the Smart Freight Centre. With this new aim and the GLEC Framework, the next test was carried out in 
the LEARN project.  

75 International Organization for Standardization. International Harmonized Method(s) for a Coherent Quantification of CO2 Emissions 
of Freight Transport. (2015). (https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:iwa:16:ed-1:v1:en) 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

LEARN 

While the COFRET had a strong research purpose, that is to create the harmonized methodology, the LEARN 
had a socialization purpose.  

The  industry  needed  to  see  the  credibility  of  the  GLEC  Framework  in  order  to  be  widely  accepted.  The 
European Commission needed to emphasized the legitimacy of the standard in order to cement its position in 
legislation.  

Thus, the two main objectives were as follows: 

1.  Test the methodology in real-world situations together with the industry.  
2.  Elevate the GLEC Framework from an industry standard to an international standard, namely an ISO 

standard. 

The project was a Community Support Action. The main actions were engagement with the key stakeholders 
who were calculating emissions in freight transport, and to carry out pilots of the GLEC Framework in real-
world situations. Besides industry actors, the project reached out to other programs, which had developed 
their own approach, which at the time were primarily Green Freight Programs. Some examples, were ADEME 
(France), Smartways (US), Ecostars and the Low Emission Reduction Scheme (UK), Lean and Green (NL) and 
Clean Cargo (BSR).  

To expand the reach in Europe, the consortium worked closely with ALICE ETP-LOGISTICS.  

In  addition,  the  consortium  prepared  the  way  for  engagement  with  the  ISO  Committee,  by  preparing  a 
proposal for the ISO 14083. Andrea Schoen from DB Schenker, supported by Verena Ehrler (DLR) and Alan 
Lewis (SFC) led the proposal to the ISO Committee, which showed the industry support to the initiative. The 
funding for Alan Lewis to eventually become project manager for the ISO Working Group was crowdfunded 
from the industry partners.  

Some of the results and outcomes of the project include 

•  GLEC Framework v2 
•  Roadmap towards Zero-emission logistics 
•  Start of the ISO 14083 process 
•  The LEARN final conference provided  

The  project  provided  SFC  with  more  legitimacy  as  a  non-profit  organization  to  advocate  the  harmonized 
emissions calculation to the industry, including the resources to provide and expand its technical competence 
and services.  

H2Haul 

The H2Haul project wants to validate the ability of FCE-HDV to provide zero-emission mobility for heavy-duty 
applications and will lay the foundations for the commercialisation of FCE-HDV76. 
The  H2Haul  project  aims  at  developing  and  deploying  16  FCE-HDV.  The  vehicles  will  be  deployed  in  four 
countries: Belgium, France, Germany and Switzerland. Two type of trucks will be demonstrated: 26 tonnes 
rigid truck and 44 tons truck-trailer combination in a variety of use cases. 
In addition, three hydrogen refuelling stations for trucks will be built within H2Haul. Air Liquide developed a 
new high-capacity hydrogen refuelling station at a working pressure of 700 bar, the first of his kind in Europe.  
Two other stations, in Belgium and Switzerland, were built with project support. The two HRS built in Germany 
are subsidized by other programs. 

76 https://www.h2haul.eu/ 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

The first HRS at 700 bar designed for trucks is developed in the H2Haul project77. 

At this moment, the 3 subsidized HRS are operational and the newly developed FCE-HDV will be demonstrated 
from  the  end  of  2023.  Currently  the  stations  are  providing  hydrogen  to  vehicles  developed  in  other  R&I 
projects, like Waterstofregio2.0 and HyAMMED78.     

https://www.h2haul.eu/air-liquide-and-iveco-group-reaffirm-their-commitment-to-hydrogen-at-the-inauguration-of-

77 
the-first-high-pressure-hydrogen-station-for-long-haul-trucks-in-europe/ 

78 https://techsnooper.io/air-liquide-va-ouvrir-a-fos-sur-mer-la-premiere-station-hydrogene-pour-poids-lourds-deurope/ 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

5 

Implementation cases 

5.1  Overview on Outcomes and Implementation cases 

As stated before, BOOSTLOG aims at establishing causal links between the public R&I funding and deployment 
of results in the market; such links can be created through projects’ Outcomes and Implementation cases. 
Within  the  BOOSTLOG  project,  Outcomes  are  primarily  understood  as  products,  services  or  solutions  for 
business applications aiming at addressing Pain Points and other value-added results potentially impacting the 
market (by creating it or transform it), the company’s operations as well as polices and regulation.  

Implementation Cases are considered as outcomes where research results have been further developed and 
have  been  deployed  as  commercial  solutions,  have  generated  a  new  market  or  have  contributed  to  new 
policies. 

In the scope of the present report, all outcomes from the 8 identified projects in the area of “Efficient and 
zero-emission freight transport and emission reporting” have been identified and analysed with respect to 
their grade of implementation. It is distinguished between (1) outcomes which have been implemented in a 
real-life environment and which are still in operation today or further used/developed in other commercial 
framework – the so-called "Implementation cases”, (2) outcomes which have been demonstrated during the 
project and/or implemented afterwards in a real-life environment, but disrupted or stopped meanwhile, and 
(3) outcomes, which have not yet been demonstrated or deployed in real-life operation.  

In total, 23 Outcomes have been identified, thereof 4 implementation cases (= category 1), 7 demonstrations 
and/or temporary implementations (= category 2) and 11 outcomes without any implementation. 

Acronym 

UDRIVE 

TRANSFORMERS 

AEROFLEX 

ENSEMBLE 

Modales 

H2Haul 

COFRET 

LEARN 

Implementation case 

Demonstration and/or temporary 
implementation 

Outcome without implementation 

- Homologated trailer with 
improved loading capacity and 
aerodynamics. Ready for market 
uptake 

- E-axle with regenerative braking 

- Pulling e-dolly (regulation and 
homologation ongoing) 
- remote controlled yard 
operations with e-dolly 
- e-trailer (trailer with battery 
pack) 

- Naturalistic driving behaviour 
study 
- Insights in parameters eco-
driving 

- Key insights European transport 
market 
- My PUZZLE 
- Freight study 2040 

- Multi-brand platoon 

- Low-emission driving app  

- ISO/DIS 4272 Truck platooning 
systems (TPS) 
- Collaborative AEBS 
- Methodology to optimise the 
driving of automated vehicles 
- Training eco-driving 

- Hydrogen refuelling stations for 
trucks 

- 16 fuel cell electric hydrogen 
trucks 

GLEC Framework  
ISO 14083 
CountEmissionsEU 

Methodology applied in case 
studies. 

- COFRET methodology 
- ISO International Workshop 
Agreement 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

5.2 

Implementation cases 

Four of the selected R&I projects led to implementation cases. The COFRET project led to the development 
GLEC  Framework,  which  is  adapted  in  the  CountEmissionsEU  proposal  and  a  ISO  standard  for  emission 
reporting. The TRANSFORMERS and AEROFLEX  resulted in the development of an e-axle with regenerative 
braking and an innovative trailer with improved load efficiency and aerodynamics. The last implementation 
case is found in the H2Haul project, where the first European 700 bar HRS for trucks was developed in.  

5.2.1.  COFRET 

Smart Freight Centre was founded during the last year of the COFRET project and has been instrumental in 
the past decade to develop and promote the GLEC Framework in the logistics sector, to develop it into an ISO 
standard, as well as to be adopted in the CountEmissionsEU proposal on transport emissions calculation and 
reporting. There were a couple of opportunities that came together to allow SFC to create impact based off 
COFRET’s project results. However, this was only possible since COFRET was successful in creating results with 
high impact.  

Some of the main reasons that COFRET was successful were: 

•  The topic addressed a relevant industry question at the time. Besides the growing environmental 
interest,  companies  were  also  interested  in  accurately  calculating  fuel  consumption  along  the 
transport chain for financial reasons. Fuel prices were high, and the industry was still reeling from the 
financial crisis of 2007-2009.  

•  A visionary and invested project officer from the EC. The assigned project officer was from DG MOVE 
and was thus interested and knowledgeable about the transport sector rather than having a focus on 
research. This steered the project outcomes towards what was practical rather than what was purely 
academic. He only finalized the consortium grant agreement, if a strong industry advisory group was 
part of the project. Hence, from the beginning the project had an industry-orientation, which made 
the final project results high-impact for the industry.  

•  Strong and engaged industry advisory board. The project benefitted from a strong and active advisory 
board consisting of members of leading industry actors, such as IKEA, Scania, DB Schenker, UPS, etc. 
Their  involvement  and  commitment  throughout  the  project  were  crucial  in  guiding  the  project's 
direction, making decisions, and ensuring alignment with industry needs, i.e., to develop something 
that can be really used by the group it was created for.  The board remained open to new members, 
which signaled that other industry actors were always invited to contribute to the project. 

•  Permission to change grant agreement and project direction midway. The industry advisory board 
wanted  a  shift  from  developing  a  new  methodology  and  tool  towards  a  harmonization  of  existing 
methods through a common framework. The project officer supported these changes to be made in 
the grant agreement midway during the project, which included changes with respect to timeline and 
budget.  

• 

•  Collaboration  with  DG  MOVE.  The  collaboration  and  support  from  two  individuals  in  DG  MOVE,  , 
contributed  significantly  to  the  project's  success,  and  paved  the  way  for the  follow-up  EU  project, 
LEARN.  Their  involvement  and  backing  demonstrated  a  strong  commitment  from  the  EU  side, 
fostering a positive environment for the project's development and for post-project uptake.  
Industry-led ambition to standardize emissions accounting. While what the industry wanted was an 
ISO norm, this could not be accomplished directly within the COFRET project due to lack of time and 
resources. Hence, the decision was made to produce an International Workshop Agreement, which is 
a “a workshop mechanism outside of ISO committee structures, following a procedure that ensures 
the broadest range of relevant interested parties worldwide have the opportunity to participate, and 
the  workshops.” 
are  approved  by  consensus  amongst 
(https://www.iso.org/deliverables-all.html#IWA, Accessed 31.07.2023) The IWA served in this case as 

individual  participants 

the 

in 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       50 

 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

a precursor to a full-fledged ISO norm. The result, codified in an industry-approved medium, such as 
the IWA, sent a strong signal for relevance compared to the other, often academic, publications that 
were created in the project.  

•  Consortium and project coordinator that rose to the occasion. The COFRET project would not have 
been feasible without a strong and dynamic project coordinator, as well as the consortium partners 
that were willing and agile to adapt to the changing needs of the project.  

In short, the individuals in the project took the initiative, in many cases, outside of the ‘normal’ expected effort 
to create lasting value from the project. From the researchers to the project officer; the industry to the public 
authorities; there was a concerted effort to produce what would be impactful to the industry, as expressed by 
the industry members themselves. Many of the same individuals would take this onwards through the GLEC, 
Smart Freight Centre, the LEARN project and to the ISO 14083 standard.  

It could be considered that the rest of the journey from COFRET to ISO 14083 was due to its post-exploitation 
activities. As COFRET created the framework, the idea was to apply them in as many countries as possible. This 
led to Smart Freight Centre (SFC) that was still in its infancy that aimed at playing a role somewhat as a global 
green freight program, in alignment with and integrating with regional (e.g., Green Freight Asia) or national 
(e.g., Smartways) green freight programs.  

COFRET contacted the founder of SFC and together with the industry advisory board, as well as DG MOVE, 
made a plan to transition COFRET’s framework and the industry advisory board to be hosted by SFC. The 
industry  advisory  board  became  the  Global  Logistics  Emission  Council  (GLEC)  advisory  board.  The  COFRET 
framework was reworked to become more practical in the form of the GLEC Framework publication, which 
provided reader-friendly (as opposed to expert-oriented) guidance into how emissions calculation should be 
applied.  

Other milestones: 

•  The follow-up project LEARN, coordinated by SFC, exposed the GLEC Framework more intensively to 
the industry via the respective green freight programs and case studies. Close collaboration with other 
associations in the space, such as ALICE, played a crucial role in ensuring that the dissemination and 
communication activities were impactful. 

•  The start of the ISO working group hosted by the German norms association, DIN, led by the COFRET 
project coordinator also began. SFC led the work on logistics emissions calculation as project manager. 
The ISO 14083 was published April 2023.  

•  The  CountEmissions  EU  proposal,  published  July  2023,  will  use  the  ISO  14083  as  the  calculation 
methodology. SFC continues to work closely with DG MOVE to support their initiative. Standardizing 
the fuel emission factor and intensity databases, the assurance scheme and the verification of tools, 
are key features that will ensure the proposal makes impactful change in the emissions reporting in 
the EU.  

Once the CountEmissions EU proposal and the associated directives are in place, more work will need to be 
done  to  align  actual  implementation  in  the  transport  sector.  Standardization  is  after  all  not  about 
standardization  of  techniques,  but  standardization  of  the  implementation  of  techniques.  And  more 
importantly, it is about applying the techniques to drive real-world lasting change for the sake of addressing 
humanity’s greatest collective challenge, anthropogenic climate change.  

5.2.2.  TRANSFORMERS and AEROFLEX: Innovative trailer and e-axle 

The  consecutive  projects  TRANSFORMERS  and  AEROFLEX  resulted  in  two  implementation  cases:  and 
innovative trailer design and regenerative e-axle. The trailer designed by Van Eck Trailers in TRANSFORMERS 
is optimised for assignments were the trailer volume is not optimally used. The new trailer design increases 
the load capacity within the weight and dimensions regulations (valid at the time of the project). The trailer 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       51 

 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

had  an  adjustable,  double  floor  system,  which  is  adaptable  per  mission.  The  double  floor  is  sectionalised, 
adjustable in height and the double floor can be put in place by a forklift during loading. The inner floor length 
of the trailer was increased by adjustments to the front bulkhead and at the trailer end, so an extra pallet 
would fit. In addition, the roof top can be lowered to achieve a more aerodynamic shape. 

  The innovative trailer with a moveable second floor, developed during the TRANSFORMERS 
and AEROFLEX project. 

Further  AEROFLEX  adaptation  on  the  trailer  to  make  it  compatible  with  other  transport  modes  and  high 
capacity are: i) compatibility with rail transport was proven, ii) dolly can be coupled to achieve EMS2, iii) more 
aerodynamic features were added and iv) cameras to estimate the cargo load were added79. The cameras can 
give  input  to  software  (PUZZLE80)  that  can  optimize  the  loading  of  the  trailer.  An  regenerative  e-axle  is 
implemented in the trailer and was proven successful in lowering the fuel consumption. 

Now that the AEROFLEX project is finished, the trailer is homologated and will be brought on the market. The 
trailer is ready to be tested by interested logistic companies. We see the some of the innovations, like the tear 
shape and the regenerative e-axle also in commercial products of other trailer OEMs. Nevertheless, the trailer 
demonstrated in TRANSFORMERS and AEROFLEX is the first one were all the innovations (plus more) were in 
combined.  

5.2.3.  H2Haul: Hydrogen refuelling stations for trucks 

The third implementation case that was identified were the hydrogen refuelling stations (HRS), designated to 
trucks, build during the H2Haul project. The station in Fos-sur-Mer (France) of Air Liquide is the first truck HRS 
with a working pressure of 700 bar. Currently, the mass flow of the station is restricted to mid flow (90 g/s), 
since hardware and fuelling protocols are missing. Nevertheless, we see that the hydrogen truck technology 
is making the shift of 350bar to 700bar, so more hydrogen can be stored on the truck and longer driving ranges 
are attainable.  

This  first  demonstration  is  ground  breaking  and  the  development of  it  gave  insights  on missing  hardware, 
fuelling protocols and regulative framework (also for the trucks).  

79 https://www.vanecktrailers.com/nl/aeroflex-intensiveert-samenwerking-met-van-eck/ 
80 https://demo.mypuzzle.de/aeroflex/ 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

5.3  Demonstrations and temporary implementations 

As  shown  in  Table  6,  most  outcomes  of  the  selected  8  projects  have  proven  their  technical  feasibility  by 
demonstrations during the project lifetime. For logistics real “live” demonstrators of operation concepts are 
particularly  relevant.  Such  demonstrators  were  performed  successfully  in  TRANSFORMERS,  AEROFLEX, 
ENSEMBLE, H2Haul and Modales. All these and other operation concepts worked well during the project and 
fulfilled their technical requirements. 

6  Potential implementation paths 

We end this Cloud Report with an overview of the identified potential implementation paths were we should 
work on to make ‘Monitoring and implementing efficient and zero-emission freight transport’ a success. In 
addition some key factor for a successful project are given together with recommendations.  

From the interviews and the analysis of the finished R&I projects, it became clear that future R&I projects 
about efficient and zero-emission freight transport should focus on 5 fields: 

Technical innovations 

- 
-  Digitalisation 
-  Regulative framework 
-  Digital twin 
- 

Emission reporting 

Technical innovations comprehend the further development of the durability of aerodynamic improvement, 
trucks  and  trailers  innovations  and  infrastructure.  Further  innovations  in  the  capabilities  of  zero  emission 
trucks (driving range, weight) will be key. Also, innovations in charging infrastructure (MCS, dynamic charging 
and ERS) and high capacity HRS will happen. R&I projects that lead to further upscaling and increased reliability 
of both zero emission trucks and their infrastructure are necessary.  

In parallel to the technical R&I projects, the regulative framework needs to be updated, so the innovations 
can be demonstrated and implemented in real life operations. From the current assessment we learn that it 
takes  time  to  adjust  regulative  framework  and  develop  ISO  norms.  Therefore,  the  revision  of  regulative 
frameworks  needs  to  start  as  early  as  possible.  Extra  legal  support  (especially on  national  level)  would  be 
beneficial. 

The capabilities of zero-emission truck-trailer combinations are strongly linked to availability of infrastructure 
and how their operation is planned (use case dependent). Digitalisation and digital twins are necessary to 
assess  the  full potential of zero-emission trucks and  support the implementation of these vehicles  in fleet 
operation, which will be use case dependent. Tools to implement zero-emission truck in fleets and integrate 
charging and fuelling in the logistic operation are needed (route optimisation, booking of charging/fuelling 
slots…). Also connected vehicles that can communicate to other assets (V2X) will be needed. Special attention 
should be given to data quality and standardisation communication protocols.  

Innovations will only be adopted in the logistic industry if there is a viable business case. R&I project should 
consider ecosystem building and explore scenarios to make the logistic innovations economically viable. Some 
of the logistic innovations are strongly dependent on the innovation in other industries. As an example, the 
sustainability  of  zero-emissions  trucks  is  dependent  of  the  decarbonisation  status  of  the  energy  industry. 
Further research is needed to see how all industries can reach their sustainability goals. 

It is expected that R&I projects on these topics will lead to implementation cases. We see that in the ongoing 
zero-emission  truck  projects  (EMPOWER,  ESCALATE, NextEtrucks  and  ZEFES),  all  topics are  included  in  the 
project. Even digitalisation in an indirect way, since it is necessary to establish the digital twin. 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       53 

 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

As last we mention emission reporting as a possible implementation path. The finished project on emission 
reporting COFRET and LEARN have led to a real uptake  of the industry. They even let to an initiative for a 
common framework to calculate and report transport-related greenhouse gas emissions (CountEmission EU). 
New R&I project on this topic funded by Horizon Europe81 are aiming to further improve the methodology and 
the data quality and are widening the scope. 

In Figure 13 a visualisation of the potential implementation paths is given. 

Visualisation  of  the  five  potential  implementation  pathways  for  ‘Monitoring  and 
implementing zero-emission freight transport’. 

Overall, there can be three lessons learned from the finished projects to improve the quality of the project 
and its outcomes.  

First of all, end users (shippers, carriers) should be active and empowered in the project. They should have 
least have a role as active stakeholder group member, but preferably they are funded partner. As end user, or 
the paying customer, they are the key for successful implementation of innovations. 

The stakeholder group is also important for ecosystem building. In logistics the full value chain is interlinked, 
so  communication  between  the  different  stakeholder  groups  and  working  together  are  key  for  successful 
implementation of innovations.  

And as last one, we want to stress the importance of a project officer, that empowers and is willing to align 
with evolving needs of sector. Sometimes and adjustment of scope, even during the project, is the best thing 
to do. And this can only be done when the project officer is receptive for feedback from the project. 

When evaluating potential implementation paths, it is also worth highlighting supporting factors for successful 
projects  and  implementations.  The  following  factors  are  already  published  in  an  earlier  Cloud  Report,  but 
would like to repeat them as they are general applicable. 

The supporting factors can be allocated to four areas, (1) Composition of the consortium, (2) Topic/subject of 
the project, (3) Process of tendering/application/funding,  and (4) Project execution and implementation of 
outcomes.  

(1)  Composition of the consortium  

81 HORIZON-CL5-2023-D6-01-08: Future-proof GHG and environmental emissions  factors for accounting emissions  from 
transport and logistics operations 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

•  Right mix of partners - involvement of real operating partners and the final end-user  
•  Trust within consortium (complementary interests, advantages visible for all partners, partners 

knowing each other); 

•  Same  level  of  knowledge  and  “access”  to  the  topic  (skilled  experts  from  the  project  partners 

involved in the project work);  

•  Partner commitment - Sufficient efforts of partners investing in the project.  

(2)  Topic/subject of the project  

•  Project/Solution must be economically viable;  
•  Projects must be linked to real practice;  
•  Project must consider European decision-making environment (entity and rules / priorities);  
•  Focus on a fewer, but dedicated topics better than including everything.  

(3)  Process of tendering/application/funding  

•  National  projects  often  allow  more  efficient  consortia  (limited  number  of  partners, 

complementary interests);  

•  Flexibility  for  project  design  in  application  phase,  focus  on  project  result  (e.g.  demonstrator, 

product), NOT on tasks/work content.  
(4)   Project execution and implementation of outcomes  

•  Rules  in  the  grant  agreement,  if  deployment  does  not  happen  to  hand  over  IPRs  e.g.  to  a 

• 

“Implementation agency”;  
Idea: dedicated consultant paid by EU for project documentation and administration (selected by 
the consortium); - Stronger commitment requested to exchange information – strong stakeholder 
board 

•  Non-feasibility of a solution might be also an outcome. 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       55 

 
 
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

Annex I – Semi-structured interview guide 

Cloud Report: Efficient and zero-emission logistics  

1. 

Project introduction   

For more  than  two  decades  EU  has  invested  in  research  and  innovation  (R&I)  through various  Framework 
Programmes, e.g. FP5 (1998-2002), FP6 (2002-2006), FP7 (2007-2013), and the ongoing HORIZON 2020 (2014 
–  2020).  This  has  contributed  to  the  development  of  the  logistics  sector  through  the  creation  of  new 
companies,  implementation  of  concepts  in  practice  and  through  science  based regulation. The  BOOSTLOG 
project  aims  to  boost  impact  generated  from  future  EU  funded  R&I  projects  to  contribute  to  EU  policy 
objectives, address societal challenges and increase EU’s competitiveness. The project will map more than 160 
projects funded by FP5, FP6, FP7 and Horizon 2020, and identify successful implementation cases into the 
market and regulations and will develop actionable reports on various subjects prioritized by stakeholders. 
The project will assess the impacts generated, identify gaps and priorities for future funding programmes.  

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       56 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

2. 

Cloud and subclouds diagram   

• 

3. 

Do you miss any important cloud/subcloud?  

Most relevant projects in the cloud  

Efficient and zero-emission logistics  

LCA emissions reporting  

• 

Do you miss a relevant R&I project not included here?  

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       57 

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

4. 

Organizations with highest participation in relevant projects in the cloud  

• 
• 

Do you miss an important/relevant organization with good R&I results in this area?  
If yes? Which organizations and for which results? Who is the contact person?  

5. 

Trends and societal drivers relevant/addressed for the Cloud  

LIST of trends and societal drivers:  
Climate change, electrification, emissions, (energy) efficiency others  

• 
• 

6. 

Do you agree with this list of External Factors?  
Which are for you the 2/3 most critical/relevant?  

Relevant EU policies addressed  

LIST of policies addressed by the cloud:  

•  The European Green Deal  
o  Fit for 55  

•  Economy that Works for People  
•  Promoting our European way of life  
•  A Europe fit for the digital age  

• 
• 

Which other policies you know are also relevant?  
Which is the EU policy this area has a greater impact?  

Project participation of your organization per Cloud  
Have your organization participated in other relevant projects? Which ones? Could you share 

Which are the most Relevant/Key R&I results project deliverables for each project? Could 

Which have been the key partners on those projects à Generating results/outcomes and 

7. 
• 
some information references?  
• 
you share them with us?  
• 
after project implementation?  
• 

Overall, which is your conclusion on the projects in terms of:  

▪  Progress made  
▪  Level of adoption of results  
▪  Which have been for you the 2/3 key barriers for adoption?  

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       58 

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

▪  Which would you think is the best (or best 2 projects) and why?  

8. 
• 
• 

Project Outcomes  
Do you have any outcome out of these projects in this field?  
If a research center, is it your ambition to transfer/implement the Knowledge?  

o  How your organization address that?  

▪  Through Market agreements on Knowledge Transfer to Companies.  
▪  Spin offs  
▪  Other  

• 

What is the main barrier to reach the market you faced:  

Financing for further development.  
▪ 
Finding right (industry) partners  
▪ 
▪  Value proposition towards customers.  
▪  Business models.  
▪  Other?  

• 

Do you have outcomes out of R&I projects in other BOOSTLOG CLOUDS?  

9. 
• 
• 
Seeker.  
• 

Implementation Cases   
Do you know any Implementation Cases out of these projects?  
If yes, which entity was the R&I/Outcome owner and which entity was the Innovation 

Would you like ALICE/BOOSTLOG to promote the Implementation Case?  

Final comments  
How could we improve the interviews?  
Would you like to join a workshop in which we will share the aggregated results and discuss 

10. 
• 
• 
conclusions with your peers?  
Any further comment.  
• 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       59 

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
Document elaborated with the support of the BOOSTLOG project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101006902 

We would like to thank the experts the we have interviewed and helped us to determine the project outcomes 
and implementation cases. 

Table 7: List of interviewees, their organisation and the project they have worked on  

Name 

Project 

Sergio Barbarino 

TRANSFORMERS 

Organisation 

P&G 

Business developer 

H2Haul 

DATS 24 (Colruyt Group) 

Ton Bertens 

AEROFLEX, TRANSFORMERS, (ZEFES) 

Van Eck Trailers 

Verena Ehrler 

COFRET, LEARN 

Marika Hoedemaeker 

UDRIVE 

DLR 

TNO 

Ben Kraaijenhagen 

AEROFLEX, TRANSFORMERS, ENSEMBLE, (ZEFES) 

(former) MAN 

Alan Lewis 

COFRET, LEARN 

Smart Freight Center 

Paul Mentink 

AEROFLEX, (ZEFES, NextETruck) 

TNO 

Sophie Punte 

COFRET, LEARN 

Smart Freight Center 

Mats Rosenquist 

ENSEMBLE, AEROFLEX, TRANSFORMERS, (ZEFES)  VOLVO 

Isabelle Schnell-Lortet 

ENSEMBLE 

VOLVO 

Cor Van der Zweep 

AEROFLEX, TRANSFORMERS 

UNIRESEARCH 

Dehlia Willemsen 

ENSEMBLE 

Andrew Winder 

MODALES 

Ted Zotos 

MODALES 

TNO 

ERTICO 

IRU 

BOOSTLOG project – D2.10 Cloud Repot VII – Efficient and zero emission freight transport 

       60 

 
 
 
 
 
