1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Smart Freight Centre 2024 

Suggested citation: Smart Freight Centre. Breakbulk GHG Emissions Accounting and Reporting Guidance 
2024 

This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in any form for educational or non-profit purposes without 
special  permission  from  the  copyright  holder,  provided  acknowledgment  of  the  source  is  made.  Smart  Freight 
Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of any publication that uses Breakbulk GHG Emissions Accounting 
and  Reporting  Guidance  as  a  source.  No  use  of  this  publication  may  be  made  for  resale  or  for  any  other 
commercial purpose whatsoever, without prior permission in writing from Smart Freight Centre.  

Disclaimer 
The views expressed in this publication are those Smart Freight Centre and staff, consultants and management, 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Trustees of SFC. SFC does not guarantee the accuracy of 
the data included in this publication and does not accept responsibility for consequence of their use. 

Acknowledgements 
This report was written by Marcus Lomax and Rickard Lindström of Smart Freight Centre. 

About Smart Freight Centre 
Smart Freight Centre (SFC) is a global non-profit organization dedicated to an efficient and zero emission freight 
sector. We cover all freight and only freight. SFC works with the Global Logistics Emissions Council (GLEC) and 
other stakeholders to drive transparency and industry action – contributing to Paris Climate Agreement targets and 
Sustainable Development Goals.  

Our role is to guide companies on their journey to zero emission logistics, advocate for supportive policy and 
programs, and raise awareness. Our goal is that 100+ multinationals reduce at least 30% of their logistics emissions 
by 2030 compared to 2015 and reach net-zero emissions by 2050. 

Contact 
Smart Freight Centre 
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org 

2 

 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

PROJECT BACKGROUND ............................................................................................... 4 

ISO14083 and GLEC Framework ...................................................................................... 4 

Benchmarking challenges in a diverse shipping segment ................................................. 4 

How this guidance has been developed ............................................................................... 5 

Regulations influencing the methods development ........................................................... 5 

Intensity Measures ................................................................................................................ 6 
Cargo volume and mass definition .................................................................................................................. 6 
Intensity principles and calculation of GHG intensity values ......................................................................... 7 

Transport Operation Categories (TOC) ............................................................................. 9 
Description ....................................................................................................................................................... 9 
Ballast leg(s) inclusion and assignment ......................................................................................................... 10 
Vessel integrated cargo handling gear ........................................................................................................... 10 

Reporting period and vessel inclusion .............................................................................. 11 

Distance measure ................................................................................................................ 11 
Distance to apply in GHG intensity calculations ........................................................................................... 11 
Distance to apply in scope 3 ‘footprinting’ calculations ............................................................................... 12 

ISO 14083 reporting requirements at a Transport Service Level .................................. 12 

Fuel emission factors (carbon conversion factors) .......................................................... 13 

Intensity and scope 3 calculation examples ...................................................................... 17 
Intensity calculation ....................................................................................................................................... 17 
Scope 3 calculation ........................................................................................................................................ 18 

By SFC suggested developments and revisions ................................................................ 18 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT BACKGROUND 

Smart Freight Centre (SFC) has conducted this methods development for the breakbulk sector 
by request from a significant part of the breakbulk shipping industry stakeholders. The main 
objective was to create a standard methodology for the calculation and reporting of logistics 
emissions  for  the  breakbulk  industry  in  accordance  with  and  in  alignment  to  the  existing 
industry and international standards namely the GLEC Framework1 and ISO 140832. This will 
lead  to  a  unified  and  transparent  GHG  accounting  and  reporting  methodology  within  the 
breakbulk sector, expected to trigger an increase in reporting and to lay a foundation for a more 
structured collaboration on GHG emission reduction initiatives in this sector. This includes the 
calculation and reporting of life cycle emissions in the form of Well-to-Wake (WTW) and CO2 
equivalents which can be further split into Well-to-Tank and Tank-to-Wake emissions. 

ISO14083 and the GLEC Framework 

International  standards  give  consumers  and  investors  more  confidence  in  the  products, 
services and information that they solicit from companies. Regulators and governments count 
on  standards  to  help  develop  better  and  more  consistent  policy  measures  and  regulations. 
Companies themselves save time when they can rely on standards, because they don’t have to 
reinvent the wheel. 

The GLEC Framework has rapidly become the common industry standard for calculating and 
reporting  emissions  for  freight  transportation  and  logistics. However,  a  formal  ISO  standard 
ensures a single approach that can be widely accepted by industry, governments and investors. 
SFC, together with partners, have developed a new ISO Standard ‘ISO14083’ that covers both 
passenger  and 
for 
Standardization (DIN) which  hosts  the  International  Secretariat.  The  intention  is  that  the 
principles  and  methodology  for  freight  transport  will  be  based  on,  and  consistent  with,  the 
GLEC  Framework.  This  will  emphasize  its  position  as the industry  reference  for  logistics 
emission  accounting  and  reporting  across  the  multimodal  supply  chain. ISO  14083 has 
now replaced the existing European standard EN 162583. 

in  collaboration  with  the  German 

freight  transport, 

Institute 

Benchmarking challenges in a diverse shipping segment 

Even though part of the idea of having segment specific GHG accounting standards introduced 
is to increase comparability among industry players, to facilitate benchmarking activities, it’s 
important to notice that unique designs and individual operational conditions brings complexity 
and decrease utility of benchmarking activities. It may be hard to forecast the GHG emission 
performance of a vessel, or group of vessels, and transport activity, based on another unique 
transport  activity  (cargo  type  and  operational  conditions).  For  instance,  cargo  space 

1 What is the GLEC Framework? - How to implement items | Smart Freight Centre - How to implement items | 
Smart Freight Centre 
2 ISO 14083:2023 - Greenhouse gases — Quantification and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions arising from 
transport chain operations 
3 EN 16258 - European Standards (en-standard.eu) 

4 

 
 
 
 
occupation/density will highly influence the transport efficiency. Still, the ambition is to offer a 
standard that somewhat increases the comparability and forecasting of GHG emissions.  

How this guidance was developed 

To  reach  an  agreement,  a  structured  dialogue  took  place  to  carefully  carve  out  a  GHG 
accounting  and  reporting  framework  that  gained  acceptance  among  the  sector’s  various 
stakeholders. This was done through a series of meetings with breakbulk shipper and carrier 
stakeholders  over  the  course  of  Q2,  Q3,  Q4  2023  and  Q1  of  2024.  There  were  also  some 
preparatory work done in Q3 and Q4 of 2022 during which SFC probed the interest, garnered 
support and started the identification of key methodological challenges. In parallel to group 
gatherings, written input was requested through emails and questionnaires in order to make 
sure  nothing  was  overlooked.  Overall,  the  discussions  evolved  to  focus  on  the  capturing  of 
transport activity and fuel consumption in an accurate, consistent and ‘fair’ manner.  

Key  concepts  and  operational  circumstances  were  identified  and  evaluated  from  a  GHG 
accounting perspective to ensure a common guideline that fully reflects the diverse breakbulk 
shipping  segment  and  the  requirements  of  the  aforementioned  standards  –  the  GLEC 
Framework and ISO14083. Central topics covered: 

•  A  calcula_on  methodology  for  breakbulk  sea  transport  which  takes  into  account  the 
diﬀerent types of exis_ng cargo and vessels for specialized and mixed-use, based on exis_ng 
industry prac_ces. In other words, focus on ensuring that GHG emission performances are 
fairly reﬂected irrespec_ve of cargo and vessel type.   

•  Decide  on  a  set  of  Transport  Opera_ng  Categories  (TOCs)  that  represent  a  ra_onal 

categoriza_on of commonly occurring opera_ons.  

•  The desire to oﬀer a methodology that does not rely solely on cargo mass as the unit for 

‘quan_ty of freight’ in the calcula_on of transport ac_vity. 

•  The calcula_on of GHG emissions and emission intensi_es using primary data including all 

legs and fuel consump_on during the iden_ﬁed repor_ng period. 

•  Transport  Service  Providers  report  transport  ac_vity  and  calculate  emission  intensi_es 
using actual distances (rather than the shortest-feasible-distance (SFD) or the great circular 
distance (GCD); 

Regulations influencing the methods development 

Regulations are clearly an incentive for carriers to improve data monitoring and reporting and 
have been a driver for the reporting of KPIs. In general, shipping emissions accounting under 
ISO 14083 and the GLEC Framework follow the principles developed by the maritime sector. 
ISO 14083 and the GLEC Framework are in alignment with the principles of the International 
Maritime  Organization  (IMO)  Energy  Efficiency  Operation  Index  (EEOI)  guidelines.  The  IMO 
provides guidelines to calculate the EEOI but there is no requirement to report this metric. The 
EU MRV regulation has gone a step further requiring the reporting of EEOI data which is publicly 
available (non-anonymized) on an individual ship basis.  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
Intensity Measures 

Good quality primary data is what should be used by transport service providers (carriers) to 
calculate scope 1 and scope 3 GHG emissions, and what cargo owners commonly aim to collect 
from transport service providers for their Scope 3 emissions accounting. Scope 3 emissions are 
generally based on carrier transport activity data in Tonne Kilometers (Tonne-kms), which is a 
product of quantity (mass) of freight * distance, coupled with primary fuel consumption data. 
Primary  data  can  range  from  highly  precise  information  to  aggregated  values.  Primary  fuel 
consumption  data  is  to  be  measured  by  the  transport  service  provider’s  actual  fuel 
consumption over the identified reporting period. To adapt the GHG reporting method to the 
breakbulk  sector’s  operational  and  commercial  circumstances,  it  was  decided  to  settle  on 
Freight-Revenue-tonne-kms  (FRT-kms”  (also  called  “Freight-tonne-kms“  “Revenue-tonne-
kms”)  as  the  primary  measure  of  transport  activity.  Freight  Revenue  Tonnes  represent  an 
amount of cargo where both metric tonnes and cubic meters can be included and make up the 
numerical value. Whether a shipment’s transport activity calculation is done by applying the 
cargo tonnes or cubic meters is determined by which of the two units is the greatest. In other 
words, if the value of total cargo volume occupied in cubic meters is higher than the total cargo 
tonnes, then the cubic meters value constitute the basis for calculating freight tonnes for that 
particular  shipment.  Similarily,  tonnes  would  be  the  choice  if  this  value  is  the  greater  one. 
Consequently, when summarizing all laden voyages’/shipments’ transport activity into a total 
transport  activity  number  of  FRT-kms,  the  result  will  in  most  cases  represent  an  undefined 
combined  sum  of  tonne-kms  and  cubic  meter-kms.  As  mentioned,  FRT-kms  is  the  primary 
measure of transport activity, and, as a result the primary measure for emission allocation. 
The  cargo  owner(s)  may  very  well  then  decide  to  reallocate  its  share  of  the  emissions  into 
CO2e/Tonne-kms (see reallocation calculation example on page 15) for harmonized multimodal 
reporting  where  transport  activity  and  emission  intensities  are  more  commonly  expressed 
using  a  transport  activity  measure  in  tonne-kms.  This  is  why  it  is  important  for  breakbulk 
transport service providers to report emission intensities and transport activity also in tonne-
kms (while FRT-kms remain the allocation parameter and primary transport activity measure). 

Cargo volume and mass definition   

When calculating the volume or mass of cargo when determining the RFT value, the measure 
includes any cargo handling/carrying structure, e.g. racks, cradles, or other structures in place 
to fix and handle the cargo. It also includes any packaging provided for transport by the cargo 
owner. The cubic meter measure is defined (meters) as the width * hight * depth of the overall 
cargo. The metric tonne is simply the mass in tonnes. See "intensity principles and calculation 
of GHG intensity values” section for more information on transport service provider’s provision 
of cargo mass values to cargo owners.      

The ambition of the breakbulk working group is to use the highest quality emission data from 
transport service providers and for this to be made available to actors along the same physical 
supply chain. All emission calculations, including scope 3, should be done using primary fuel 
consumption to match the cargo owner’s solicited cargo transport and the transport service 
provider’s  emission  performance  over  the  reporting  period.  In  the  case  that  emission  data 
sharing  between  transport  service  provider  and  cargo  owner  cannot  be  actioned  for  any 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
number  of  reasons,  the  cargo  owner  starting  on  their  journey  to  calculate  and  report  their 
emissions  can  use  transport  activity  data  coupled  with  a  default  emission  intensity  value 
representative of average industry operating practices. In this case, the transport activity data 
applied needs to be calculated using tonne-kms since this is the measure behind the publicly 
available default emission intensity values. As a starting point, default data with varying levels 
of precision can provide a general indication of emissions. The source of any default data used 
ought to be clearly specified by the reporting entity (typically a cargo owner). Please note that 
the  default  emission  intensity  values  in  the  GLEC  Framework  sourced  from  the  IMO  are 
expressed using tonne-kms as a measure of transport-activity and may not accurately reflect 
Breakbulk operations. A year after having started to report their Scope 3 emissions, a Cargo 
owner  should  not  rely  on  default  emission  values  for  scope  3  reporting  but  request  carrier 
specific emission intensity values for their solicited cargo transport. The commitment remains 
to  report  carrier  specific  emission  values  based  on  primary  data  for  the  transport  service 
solicited.  

It  is  important  to  remember  that  primary  data  is  more  representative  of  actual  freight 
operations than default data. Using default data may lead to results that over- or underestimate 
emissions  compared  with  actual  freight  operations.  As  efforts  to  improve  visibility  of  the 
transport chain continue to expand, a company reporting their scope 3 emissions will be able 
to transition from using default emission intensity data to using and reporting more detailed 
values based on primary data. Another option is to apply modelled emission intensity values, 
also in this case primary data generally brings higher accuracy to the result. 

Intensity principles and calculation of GHG intensity values 

The principle appointed by this standard for calculating GHG intensities is the same logic as 
behind the Energy Efficiency Operational Indicator (EEOI). This means a leg-by-leg principle is 
applied, e.g.:  

LEG 1: 1,000 Km x 20,000 FRT = 20,000,000 FRT-kms 
+ 
LEG 2: 4,000 Km x 30,000 FRT = 120,000,000 FRT-kms 
+ 
LEG 3: 3,000 Km x 0 FRT = 0 FRT-kms 

= 140,000,000 FRT-kms 

All  (see  exception  below)  fuel  consumption  at  sea  and  in  port,  laden  and  ballast, should  be 
included  in  the  production  of  the intensity  value (total  fuel  consumption / total  transport 
activity), while only cargo should go into the transport activity value, not ballast. Note that also 
shore side electricity energy consumption should be included in the consumption side of the 
calculation. Principally, fuel/energy consumption related to maintaining the cargo and/or the 
vessel in proper condition in port is included on the consumption side of the transport chain 
intensity calculation.   

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
See GLEC Framework V 3.0 section 3 module 4 for more information on this topic. 

Fuel  consumption  exceptions:  if  a  vessel  is  “out  of  service”,  meaning  not  in  a  commercial 
operation (e.g. due to maintenance), this part of the consumption should be excluded. 

Containers  are  included  on  “equal  terms”  as  any  other  cargo,  meaning  a  loaded  container 
should  be  included  in  transport  activity  calculation,  and,  as  such  include  the  total  mass  (or 
volume) of the cargo and container needs to be accounted in the FRT calculation and emission 
allocation but the tonne-km calculation must only include the net cargo mass (excluding the 
container weight). An empty container however should be fully excluded from the transport 
activity calculation, meaning neither account for the empty weight of the container nor the 
volume  it  occupies.  Unless,  the  empty  container  is  considered  cargo  whereby  the  transport 
service provider has been contracted to transport the empty container by a cargo owner. This 
principle is applicable to both the tonne and cubic meter based transport activity calculations.  

Please note that for the transport service provider, generally, the ‘cargo’ is quantified as both 
the actual cargo and any packaging (e.g. a container). Therefore, when determining transport 
activity, the full weight of all those components will most often be included in the calculation 
(“cargo gross weight”). From the cargo owner’s perspective however, only the actual cargo is 
considered the ‘quantity of freight’ when determining the transport activity. As a result, the 
cargo owner must be aware that the emission intensity value provided by the transport service 
provider may represent the ‘gross quantity of freight’. It is therefore of paramount importance 
that the transport service provider communicates to the cargo owner the total Well-to-Wake 
emissions, the emission intensities in tonne-kms and FRT-kms and the total transport activity 
values  for  the  cargo  owners  solicited  transport  services,  with  the  emission  intensities  and 
transport  activity  in  tonne-kms  expressed  using  the  net  mass  of  the  cargo  excluding  the 
container weight or cargo handling equipment. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transport Operation Categories (TOC) 

The rationale behind Transport Operation Categories is to find the most appropriate grouping 
of  vessel  operations  that  share  similar  characteristics  and  reflect  the  identified  transport 
activities in a manner that enables cargo owners to select a representative emission intensity 
value to apply for their scope 3 foot printing, as opposed to applying a value ‘diluted’ by vessels 
and voyages not relevant for the cargo owner concerned. There may be some degree of dilution 
which  inevitably  needs  to  be  accepted  for  the  sake  of  practicality.  Likewise,  dilution/lower 
granularity may be a well-informed deliberate decision in cases where granularity ambitions 
are low and simplicity prioritized. In the elaborative discussions and assessment in finding the 
most suitable TOC’s, below categorization’s were identified:  

-  Voyage basis 
-  Vessel basis 
-  DWT category basis 
-  Full ﬂeet 

Description 

Voyage basis 

TOC defined as a single vessel on a single voyage (including intermediary port calls). Specific 
voyages/legs are selected for aggregation. Suitable, for instance, when operations are scattered 
in  terms  of  space,  time,  and  vessel  deployment  but  high  granularity  is  desired.  Fuel 
consumption  and  transport  activity  are  summarized  from  the  selected  voyage’s  operational 
data. See section on reporting period and “ballast leg(s) inclusion and assignment” below. 

Vessel basis  

TOC defined as a single vessel’s aggregated operational and emission data over the reporting 
period (typically 12 months). See section on reporting period and “ballast leg(s) inclusion and 
assignment” below. 

DWT category basis 

A  group  of  vessels  operational  and  emission  data  aggregated  over  the  reporting  period 
(typically 12 months). DWT is the determining factor for vessel selection. There are four DWT 
categories (TOC 1 – 4) to apply, those are (DWT value): TOC 1 = 0 – 9,999. TOC 2 = 10,000 – 
34,999. TOC 3 = 35,000 – 59,999. TOC 4 = >59,999. This categorization is derived from IMO’s 
4th GHG study. Operational data from each respective DWT category is aggregated separately. 
See section on reporting period below.  

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Full fleet 

All vessels in the fleet are selected for aggregation. See section on reporting period below.   

Ballast leg(s) inclusion and assignment 

The  guiding  principle  is  that  all  operations  should  be  accounted  for,  meaning  all  fuel 
consumption  from  laden  and  ballast  voyages  need  to  be  included  in  the  GHG  emissions 
intensity calculation(s). It is therefore of importance to include the emissions of ballast voyages 
when  calculating  the  TOC’s  emission  intensity.  This  inclusion  of  ballast  emissions  can  be 
accounted as follows:  

Voyage basis 

Voyage basis aggregation refers to when operational and emission data of a single voyage forms 
the basis of the emission intensity of the TOC. The TOC is defined as a single vessel on a single 
voyage  (including  intermediary  port  calls).  All  ballast  legs  related  to  the  voyage  are  to  be 
included. Generally, if preceded by a ballast leg, it’s associated fuel consumption and emissions 
is allocated to the rest of the transport chain. (See example 4.4 on p.119 of GLEC Framework 
V3.) In this context, a transport chain is defined as a consecutive series of loading and discharge 
operations, whereby a (or multiple) cargo owner(s) charter a Breakbulk ship, and this may or 
may not be preceded by a ballast leg.  

Vessel basis 

When the TOC is defined as the operations of a vessel of the reporting period. Assigning ballast 
leg emission is straightforward. All ballast leg emissions of the specific vessel during the reporting 
period are included in the calculation of the emission intensity of the TOC. If a laden or ballast leg 
crosses over two reporting periods, the Estimated Time of Departure (ETD) shall determine the 
reporting period to which it belongs. 

Fleet and DWT basis 

Same logic as for “vessel specific basis”, applied for all vessels in the fleet or the DWT grouping to 
form a fleet or DWT based Transport Operation Category (TOC.) 

Vessel integrated cargo handling gear 

Fuel  consumption  related  to  cargo  handling  in  port  should  in  principle  be  assigned  to  the 
calculation  related  to  “hub  activities”.  This  is  typically  a  separate  part  of  the  cargo  owner’s 
scope 3 calculations constituting a separate element in the cargo owner’s overall multi-modal 
transport chain. ISO14083 and the GLEC Framework offers guidance with regards to accounting 
for  emission  and  activity  data  related  to  hub  operations.  In  the  breakbulk  sector  it  is  very 
common  for  vessels  to  integrate  cargo  handling  gear.  However,  it  became  clear  during  the 
working  group’s  methodological  development  that  it  is  often  hard  to  separate  the  fuel 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumption induced by cargo handling from the propulsion related one. Therefore, it is of 
high  importance  that  the  carrier  informs  the  cargo  owner,  whether  cargo  handling  fuel 
consumption  is  part  of  the  vessel  (or  other  TOC  category)  GHG  intensity  value.  If  the  fuel 
consumption due to cargo handling in port is part of the vessel/TOC operational intensity value 
this will increase the emission intensity value. The cargo owner as a result will either not need 
to account for the hub operation related to the maritime container terminal operation and/or 
transshipment or modify the value associated with any transshipment if this is already taken 
into account in the breakbulk operation.  

Reporting period and vessel inclusion 

The repor_ng period occurs on a calendar year basis, meaning the data collected will represent 
the past calendar year’s operational data. This is similar to the repor_ng period used in the Sea 
Cargo  Charter  (SCC)4  and  Clean  Cargo5.  In  the  future,  the  reporting  period  may  move  to  a 
quarterly  basis  to  the  carrier  performance  data  from  2025  onwards  to  meet  the  desires  of 
shippers  requesting  higher  reporting  frequency  in  their  scope  3  foot  printing.  Naturally,  the 
voyage  based  TOC  reporting  will  not  by  default  represent  a  full  calendar  year  but  instead  a 
specific  and  punctual  transport  operation.  The  other  TOC’s  are  principally  produced  by 
aggregating all operations from the full past calendar year.  

All  owned,  managed  and  operated  vessels  should  be  included  in  the  reporting.  A  shipper 
applying  a  GHG  intensity  value  in  its  scope  3  calculations  might  (depending  on  ambition  on 
granularity) need to be informed whether any potential transshipments have been part of the 
cargo movements or not.  

Distance measure 

Distance to apply in GHG intensity calculations 

The distance by which a shipment is transported is measured from the point where the cargo 
is ﬁrst loaded onboard the vessel to where the cargo is unloaded at its ﬁnal port des_na_on. 
While this may seem simple, especially in light of developments in GPS and telematics systems, 
finding distance is part of what makes logistics GHG accounting a complicated endeavor. Many 
shipments involve multiple transport legs and modes; some are handled by multiple carriers. 
Sometimes  there  are  intermediate  stopovers  in  locations  that  reflect  a  carrier’s  transport 
network rather than the most direct route. Sometimes routes are modified due to weather, 
tides, construction or traffic conditions, information that may or may not be known to other 
parties.  This  is  complicated  further  by  goods  traveling  on  shared  transport  assets,  where 
shipments are consolidated to increase vehicle loading and hence efficiency, but may lead to 
longer distances being travelled than would be the most direct route for an individual shipment. 
Distance  information  should  be  collected  for  each  transport  leg,  either  through  direct 
measurement or estimation and represent the overall route as far as possible. The transport 

4 Sea Cargo Charter is a maritime organisation set up to help signatories understand their operating carbon 
footprint and determine whether their overall emissions intensity aligns with IMO targets to reduce absolute 
emissions from global activity by 50% compared to 2008 levels 
5 Clean Cargo | Smart Freight Centre 

11 

 
 
 
 
activity distance is the actual distance, meaning the actual distance travelled between port a 
and D including intermediary stopovers.  

Distance to apply in scope 3 ‘footprinting’ calculations 

Distance  information  should  be  collected  directly  or  indirectly  (e.g.,  via  a  Logistics  Service 
Provider) from the carrier(s) concerned and represent the overall route as far as possible. It is 
of fundamental importance (provided high accuracy is aspired to) that the distance measure 
applied in scope 3 application is the same as applied the GHG intensity calculation. To bring 
about an accurate end-result, there ought to be an information link between the carrier and 
cargo owner to ensure the real route (and actual distances) between port of origin and port of 
destination is reflected in the distance number. As mentioned above, a carrier who applies the 
actual distance will still need to ensure the overall route (e.g. port A-C-D-E) is reflected since 
actual  distance  refers  to  the  actual  distance  travelled  between  a  port  of  origin  and  port  of 
destination including intermediary port stopovers/port calls.  

Breakbulk carriers report emission intensity value and transport activity using actual distances 
for the transport service they provide to cargo owners and freight forwarders. If the working 
group were to produce emission intensity values for general scope 3 reporting for the wider 
public, then emission intensity values would need to be provided using the shortest feasible 
distance or the great circular distance or actual distance adjusted with a distance adjustment 
factor.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  actual  distances  are  only  typically  known  by  carriers  and 
therefore relies on a direct information link between carrier and cargo owner. 

ISO 14083 reporting requirements at a Transport Service Level 

The report needs to identify 1) Transport Chain Elements (TCEs) or Transport Chain(s) covered 
in the report. 2) State that the report was done in reference to ISO 14083:2023.3) The total 
WTW emissions (broken down into TTW as well).4)The total WTW emission intensity(also in 
TTW) in Kgs or Tonnes of CO2e/FRT-km and Kgs or Tonnes of CO2e/tonne-km (stating the 
type of transport activity distance - actual). 5) Reference to Breakbulk accounting and 
reporting guidance. 6)The transport activity in FRT-kms and tonne-kms as described in the 
methodology (stating the transport activity distance – actual). 7) Any omissions of GHG 
sources and state reason and impact of any associated omissions. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fuel emission factors (carbon conversion factors)  

GHG emission factors play a crucial role in the calculation of transport GHG emissions and the 
calculation  of  carbon  footprints.  They  provide  a  consistent  metric  to  convert  the  fuel  and 
energy used on board to transport freight into greenhouse gas emission values. 

It is vital that GHG emission factors are based on the most credible sources. For example, the 
shipping  industry  mainly  focuses  on  the  values  published  by  International  Maritime 
Organization (IMO). However, until now the approach of the IMO has been to publish only tank-
to-wake (TTW) values. 

The  IMO  recently  decided  to  move  to  a  WTW  (well-to-wake)  reporting  basis  as  part  of  its 
updated decarbonization strategy. The IMO has been working on well-to-tank (WTT) emission 
factors that can be combined with its existing tank-to-wake (TTW) emission factors in order to 
provide a full WTW view of GHG emissions. 

This  work  lags  behind  the  decision  by  several  organizations  and  groups  (incl.  this  Breakbulk 
working  group)  to  use  well-to-wake  (WTW)  factors  to  calculate  emission  intensity  values. 
Nonetheless, the IMO’s change of perspective should be welcomed. 

The  current  status  of  the  process  is  set  out  in  MEPC  80/7/4,  the  Final  Report  of  the 
Correspondence Group on Marine Life Cycle Analysis.  Annex 1 to MEPC 80/7/4 contains draft 
guidelines on the calculation of life cycle GHG intensity of marine fuels and initial proposals for 
default values and accepted ranges for a small number of the 128 pathways identified therein. 
The fact that only a small number of the fuel pathways are represented in this way, largely due 
to a perceived lack of sufficient data, suggests that the process still has some way to go.  The 
IMO  lifecycle  assessment  guidance  (MEPC  80/7/4)  is  due  to  be  finalized  and  published  at 
MEPC81 (scheduled for Q2 2024). This document will provide a widely accepted framework for 
defining emission factors which will become the standard for the maritime industry; however, 
the timing of this publication implies that it will not be available for the next reporting period. 
Once this is published, it may still not be a definitive answer to emission factor definition as 
further changes are expected as this is an evolving topic and the IMO guidance is scheduled to 
be reviewed every 3 years to ensure it is kept up to date and in alignment with other related 
initiatives. 

In  the  absence  of  IMO  published  WTW  emission  factors,  the  emission  factors  used  is 
recommended to be based on Global Logistics Emission Council (GLEC) Framework. The GLEC 
Framework has itself recently been updated to make use of the best available sources in line 
with the approach developed for, and described in, Annex J of ISO 14083. 

These emission factors are derived from the North American and European Life-cycle Inventory 
(LCI)  databases  and  their  supporting  literature  recommended  in  ISO  14083  and  the  GLEC 
Framework v3, namely: 

• 

• 

for North America the 2022 update to the GREET model, which is used as a de facto 
standard lifecycle emission inventory database for transport calcula_on throughout the 
US and as a basis for many interna_onal regula_ons and ini_a_ves; 

for Europe the primary sources are the Ecoinvent lifecycle database (v3.9.1) and work 
by  IFEU  et  al.  that  is  related  to  the  implementa_on  of  the  European  Commission’s 
renewable energy direc_ve. 

13 

 
These values have been supplemented by additional data, primarily from JEC (a collaboration 
between the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre, EUCAR (the European Council for 
Automotive  Research  and  development)  and  Concawe  (the  European  oil  companies‟ 
association  for  environment,  health  and  safety  in  refining  &  distribution)),  and  Fuel.EU 
maritime for Europe, to provide emission factors for a more complete list of fuels relevant to 
the maritime sector. 

However, there are clearly identifiable differences between the North American and European 
values which may result from real geographical variations in input data and fuel production 
processes,  but  which  may  also  be  due  to  methodological  inconsistencies.  There  are  also 
differences within the European values that depend on the available source and result directly 
from: 

•  Ecoinvent being progressive in terms of including the latest knowledge about the extent 
of fugi_ve emission in the WTT phase of fossil fuels; resul_ng in higher WTT values. 

•  Ecoinvent not currently presen_ng a full set of mari_me fuel emission factors, which is 
what introduces the need to fall back on the less up-to-date values within the Fuel.EU 
mari_me dataset. 

In the short term it is thought (position of SFC and Breakbulk working group) being best, i.e. 
pragmatic, to adopt a single set of emission factors for use - irrespective of geography.  With 
this  in  mind,  and  keeping  the  logic  that  transparency  will  be  key  to  ensure  legitimacy  and 
credibility for any pragmatic way forward, we propose the following cascading order of priority 
in coming up with a set of default emission factor values: 

1.  Emission  factors  for  conventional  liquid  fuels  in  MEPC  80/7/4  should  be  used,  where 
available; 

2. All other emission factors should be taken from the Fuel EU/ecoinvent; 

3. Any emission factors not available from 1 or 2 should be taken from the GREET database. 

Whilst this approach is biased towards European values, it does provide simplicity in not having 
two lists based on geography. Therefore we believe the values presented in the following table 
represent the best currently available set of emission factors. 

We  propose  that  once  IMO  fixes  on  a  full  set  of  WTW  values  then  these  values  will  take 
precedence. It is likely, subject to SFC and Breakbulk working group gaining a full and proper 
understanding of the approach used by IMO, that the internal consistency that will come with 
such  a  development  will  be  highly  beneficial  and  is  probably  the  best  way  forward  in  the 
medium term. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fuel  

Heavy Fuel Oil (HSHFO) 

Blends (VLSFO) 

Ultra-Low Sulfur Fuel Oil  

Liquefied Natural Gas  

Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
(Butane)  

Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
(Propane)  

Methanol  

Other  

Where:  

WTW 
Emissions  
(KgCO2e / 
Kg fuel)  

TTW 
Emissions  
(KgCO2e / 
Kg fuel)  

Source 

3.76 

3.84 

4.06 

4.05 

4.05 

4.02 

1.50 

3.84 

3.16  MEPC 80/7/4 

3.16  MEPC 80/7/4 

3.21 

3.24 

3.00 

2.97 

Ecoinvent 3.9.1 cut-off 

Fuel EU maritime amended 

Ecoinvent  3.9.1  + 
maritime 

fuel  EU 

Ecoinvent  3.9.1  + 
maritime 

fuel  EU 

1.11  GREET (USA) 

3.16  MEPC 80/7/4 

§  Heavy Fuel Oil means residual marine fuel comprised of greater than 2.5% sulfur by 

mass. This is usually low sulfur fuel oil – 3.5% sulfur (LSFO). 

§  Blends  means  marine  fuel  oil  blends  comprised  of  0.1  to  0.5%  (inclusive)  sulfur  by 

mass. It is also called as Very low sulfur fuel oil (VLSFO). 

§  Ultra-Low Sulfur Fuel Oil means a distillate or residual fuel oil comprised of less than 
0.1% sulfur by mass. Ultra-low sulfur fuel oil includes light fuel oil (LFO), marine diesel 
oil (MDO) and marine gas oil (MGO).  

§  Liquified Natural Gas means fossil based liquified natural gas. Emission factor for Otto 

dual fuel slow speed engine is applied. 

§  Liquified Petroleum Gas means fossil based liquified petroleum gas as butane or as 

propane.  

§  Methanol means natural gas based methanol.  

§  Other  means  the  fuel  is  assigned  the  “Blends”  emission  factor.  When  a  carrier  has 
burned a lower emission marine fuel, the carrier must report the fuel using this “Other” 
category.  Default  emission  factors  for  these  lower  emission  fuels  are  still  being 
determined.  Additionally,  there  is  an  increasing  use  of  lower  emission  marine  fuels 
whose emission profile is allocated by a carrier to a specific customer or customers. In 
these situations, the emission factor of the fuel actually used on a vessel cannot be 
captured in the general reporting without causing potential erroneous double counting 
of the emission profile of the lower emission marine fuel. By reporting these fuels in the 
“Other” category, the risk of erroneous double counting of the emission profile of the 
lower  emission  fuel  is  reduced. When  emission  factors  for  the  most  common  lower 
emission  fuels  are  settled  it  is  recommended  to  introduce  a  reporting  practice  that 
ensures non-customer assigned emission reductions are captured in the carriers’ GHG 
intensity numbers. This could be done by a ‘split reporting system’ where any lower 
emission  fuel  consumption  bunkered  on  behalf  of  the  carrier  itself  is  reported 
separately,  while  customer  specific  emission  reductions  are  still  reported  as 
conventional fossil fuel. This ensures no double counting and fair representation of the 
carriers’ own/in-house efforts in the GHG intensity numbers.   

15 

 
 
GREET (USA)  

EUROPE  

Source 

Biofuels/efuels  Feedstock/Remarks  

kgCO2e/kg of fuel 

kgCO2e/kg of fuel  

WTT  TTW    WTW    WTT   TTW   WTW  

Ethanol E100   Mixed feedstock  

n.a. 

n.a 

n.a 

1.29 

0.00 

1.29 

Biodiesel  

HVO  

Waste 
mix  
Waste 
mix  

feedstock 

feedstock 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

1.27 

0.00 

1.27 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

1.26 

0.00 

1.26 

Bio Methanol   Waste wood  
Black liquor  
Bio Methanol  

0.21 
0.62 

0.00 
0.00 

0.21 
0.62 

n.a 
n.a 

n.a 
n.a 

Bio-LNG  

dual 

Otto 
(medium speed)  

fuel 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

1.44 

0.95 

Bio-LNG  

Otto  dual  fuel  (slow 
speed)  

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

1.44 

0.54 

Bio-LNG  

LNG diesel 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

1.44 

0.09 

Bio-LNG  

LBSI 

n.a. 

n.a. 

n.a. 

1.44 

0.03 

IFEU et al, 
amended 

IFEU et al, 
amended 

2.39 

IFEU et al, 
amended 
n.a  GREET 
n.a  GREET 
Ifeu et al. 
amended, 
FuelEU Maritime 
amended, MEPC 
80/7/4 
Ifeu et al. 
amended, 
FuelEU Maritime 
amended, MEPC 
80/7/4 
Ifeu et al. 
amended, 
FuelEU Maritime 
amended, MEPC 
80/7/4 
Ifeu et al. 
amended, 
FuelEU Maritime 
amended, MEPC 
80/7/4 

1.98 

1.53 

1.47 

eMethanol  

W/ H2 recycling  

0.06 

0.00 

0.06 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a  GREET 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intensity and scope 3 calculation examples 

Intensity calculation  

The calculation logics will be the same irrespective of TOC categorization. Ballast leg assignment 
will be vital keeping track of in case of a voyage based TOC aggregation. In the other TOC cases 
(vessel, DWT, fleet) all ballast legs goes into one calculation (one fuel consumption assignment) 
only. 

Freight-Revenue-tonne-kms (FRT-kms) 

Leg 1: 0 FRT x 4,000 km = 0 (ballast) 

Leg 2: 20,000 FRT x 3,500 km = 70,000,000 

Leg 3: 25,000 FRT x 1,800 km = 45,000,000 

Total FRT-kms: 115,000,000 

Fuel consumption 

Total consumption in tonnes Leg 1 + Leg 2 + Leg 3: HFO 1,300 + ULSFO 2,900 

Total CO2e in tonnes: (1,300 x 3.76) + (2,900 x 4.06) = 16,662 

Intensity 

Gram CO2e per FRT-kms: (16,662 x 1,000,000) / 115,000,000 = 145 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scope 3 calculation 

If multiple cargo owners are having their cargo transportation taking place somewhere along the 
identified transport chain, all of them will apply the same intensity value (in above example 
145gCO2e/FRT-kms) representative for the chain as a whole. In other words the intensity value 
calculated summarizing all consumption including related ballast leg(s) and the full transport activity 
performed along the chain in the unit of FRT-kms. 

Tonne-km based calculation 

A cargo owner deploying a Breakbulk vessel from port A to D. The carrier informs the cargo 
owner that the Actual Distance is applied for the intensity calculation. The carrier also informs 
the cargo owner about this Actual Distance from port A to D, in this example being 17,000 km.  

The cargo owner had 80 tonnes of cargo onboard transported from port A to D. The freight 
tonne value for the same transport is 105. 

Emissions allocated to the cargo owner: 105 x 17,000 = 1,785,000 FRT-kms. 1,785,000 x 145 / 
1,000,000 = 258.8 tonne CO2e. 

Emissions per tonne cargo: 258.8 / 80 = 3.24 tonne CO2e 

TonneKm carried out on behalf of the cargo owner: 80 x 17,000 = 1,360,000  

Emission intensity in gram CO2e per tonne-kms: 258.8 / 1,360,000 x 1,000,000 = 190 

By SFC suggested developments and revisions 

-  Forma_on and establishment of a Breakbulk buyer-supplier ini_a_ve that follows this 
repor_ng standard in unity, maintain and develop its methods, and poten_ally report 
via a central plauorm to both minimize eﬀorts of bilateral sharing, and, minimize risks 
of non-standard compliant repor_ng procedures 

-  A third-party veriﬁca_on scheme 
-  Tracking of Breakbulk industry averages over _me to relate to interna_onal targets 
-  Annual revision of Fuel Emission Factors (including renewable fuels/low emission fuels) 
- 
Introduc_on  of  a  ‘split  repor_ng  system’  enabling  renewable  fuels  to  be  reﬂected  in 
cases where bunkering is done on behalf of the carrier itself (not assigned to speciﬁc 
cargo owners/shippers or LSPs) 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
