Exploring Sustainability in 
Road Freight Electrification  

A Comprehensive FAQ 

February 2024 

 
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification  
A Comprehensive FAQ 

February 2024 

© Smart Freight Centre, 2024 
Suggested citation: Smart Freight Centre. Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight Electrification: A 
Comprehensive FAQ. 2024. 
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in any form for educational or non-profit purposes without special permission 
from the copyright holder, provided acknowledgment of the source is made. Smart Freight Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of 
any publication that uses ‘Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight Electrification: A Comprehensive FAQ.' as a source.  No use 
of this publication may be made for resale or for any other commercial purpose whatsoever, without prior permission in writing from 
Smart Freight Centre. 

Disclaimer 
The views expressed in this publication are those of Smart Freight Centre and staff, consultants and management, and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Trustees of Smart Freight Centre. Smart Freight Centre does not guarantee the accuracy 
of the data included in this publication and does not accept responsibility for consequence of their use. 

Acknowledgements 
This report was written by Gabriela Rubio Domingo, Priyansh Doshi, and Tharsis Teoh of Smart Freight Centre. 

About Smart Freight Centre 
Smart Freight Centre is an international non-profit organization focused on reducing greenhouse gas emissions from freight 
transportation. Smart Freight Centre’s vision is an efficient and zero emission global logistics sector. Smart Freight Centre’s mission is 
to collaborate with the organization’s global partners to quantify impacts, identify solutions, and propagate logistics decarbonization 
strategies. Smart Freight Centre’s goal is to guide the global logistics industry in tracking and reducing the industry’s greenhouse gas 
emissions by one billion tonnes by 2030 and to reach zero emissions by 2050 or earlier, consistent with a 1.5°C future. 

Contact 
Smart Freight Centre 
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Table of Contents 

1 

Introduction .................................................................................................. 7 

2  Environmental Sustainability ................................................................... 10 

Overview ................................................................................................................... 10 
2.1  What are the most energy-intensive stages of e-trucks lifecycle? ............................ 10 
2.2  How does the lifecycle carbon footprint of e- trucks compare to that of traditional ICE 
trucks? ................................................................................................................................. 11 

Mining and extraction of key minerals and metals .............................................. 11 
2.3  What are the main environmental issues associated with mining and extraction of 
key minerals in e-trucks? ..................................................................................................... 11 
2.4  What are the most critical sustainability issues associated with key materials 
required for e-trucks? ........................................................................................................... 12 
2.5 
Is mining more impactful for ICE trucks or e-trucks? ................................................ 12 
2.6  What are solutions to identify and minimize environmental impacts of mining and 
extraction? ........................................................................................................................... 13 

Processing and Manufacturing .............................................................................. 13 
2.7  What are emissions levels from steel and aluminum manufacturing, and what viable 
decarbonization solutions are being explored within these industries? ............................... 13 
2.8  What are measures to reduce emissions related to battery manufacturing? ............ 14 

Electricity Production & Use .................................................................................. 14 
2.9  What are the environmental issues related to energy infrastructure and electricity 
production? .......................................................................................................................... 14 
2.10 
How does additional demand created by charging e-trucks affect the carbon 
content of the grid (marginal emissions)? ............................................................................ 15 
2.11  Which energy source options for electricity production are more sustainable from a 
broader sustainability perspective? How can this be measured? ........................................ 15 
2.12  What mechanisms can be used to evaluate the sustainability attributes of the 
electricity purchased and what do they include? ................................................................. 16 
How can the use of e-trucks impact noise, air pollution and safety? ..................... 17 
2.13 

Environmental Sustainability: End of Life ............................................................. 17 

2.14  What are EoL options for batteries of e-trucks? Which EoL option should be 
preferred under what circumstances? ................................................................................. 17 
2.15  What are main EoL challenges from a circularity perspective (assuming batteries 
are not to be disposed of)? .................................................................................................. 18 
2.16  What are the solutions that address environmental challenges arising from 
batteries reaching its EoL? How can logistic actors aid in mitigating these challenges? .... 19 
2.17 
How should one report lifecycle GHG emissions for e-trucks according to the GHG 
Protocol? .............................................................................................................................. 19 

3  Social Sustainability .................................................................................. 21 
3.1  What are the anticipated changes in the demand for specific materials crucial for 
EVs and renewable electricity production, and what is done to address sustainable sourcing 
shortages? ........................................................................................................................... 21 
3.2  What are the social sustainability issues associated with sourcing of raw material? 21 

                                                                                                                                   
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

3.3  What initiatives and frameworks are in place to address social sustainability 
challenges in the e-truck value chain, and how can logistic actors take advantage of them? . 
 .................................................................................................................................. 21 

3.4  Which stakeholders in the supply chain should hold responsibility for issues related 
to raw material sourcing? ..................................................................................................... 22 

4  Economic Sustainability ........................................................................... 24 
4.1  What are the major economic sustainability challenges that affect e-trucks from the 
OEM’s perspective? ............................................................................................................. 24 
4.2  What are the main solutions to existing economic and supply chain challenges that 
affect e-trucks? .................................................................................................................... 24 
4.3  What economic transformation is necessary to ensure environmental and social 
sustainability? ...................................................................................................................... 25 

Glossary ........................................................................................................... 26 

Bibliography ..................................................................................................... 27 

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Table of Figures 

Figure 1: E-trucks lifecycle and key stages involving sustainability issues. .................................. 9 

Figure 2: Breakdown of GHG Emissions for e-trucks & ICE trucks ............................................ 10 

Figure 3: Normalized, weighted, environmental impacts of the generation of 1 TWh of electricity
 .................................................................................................................................................... 16 

Figure 4: GHG emissions in the life cycle of e-trucks ................................................................. 20 

Figure 5: Responsible Minerals Initiative -Assurance Standards Landscape for the Minerals 
Supply Chain ............................................................................................................................... 23 

Table of Tables 

Table 1: Summary of sustainability issues for key metals in e-trucks ......................................... 12 

Table 2: End of Life Options for electric batteries from a circularity perspective ........................ 17 

Table 3: Main EoL challenges for batteries from a circularity perspective .................................. 18 

Table 4: Emissions reporting for EV operations based on GHG Protocol .................................. 20 

Table 5: Economic sustainability challenges that affect e-trucks from the OEMs perspective.. . 24 

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Table of Abbreviations  

AVAS: Acoustic Vehicle Alerting Systems 

CDP: Carbon Disclosure Project 

CO2: Carbon Dioxide 

EEA: European Environment Agency 

EoL: End of Life 

ESG: Environmental,Social & Corporate Governance 

e-truck: Electric Truck (Battery Powered) 

EU: European Union 

EV: Electric Vehicle 

GHG: Greenhouse Gas 

GoO: Guarantees of Origin 

GRI: Global Reporting Initiative 

ICE: Internal Combustion Engine 

kt: kilotonne 

OEM: Original Equipment Manufacturer 

PM: Particulate Matter 

PV: Photovoltaic 

RMI: Responsible Mineral Initiative 

TWh: Trillion watt hours 

UNECE: United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

1 

Introduction 

Road  freight,  predominantly  powered  by  fossil  fuel,  contributes  more  than  half  of  the  carbon 
dioxide emissions produced in trade-related transport globally (ITF 2019). In Europe, road freight 
is accountable for over 19% of the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the transport sector, and 
this figure is anticipated to grow by 8% by 2050 (ICCT 2022). Notably, a significant amount of 
these  GHG  emissions  typically  arise  from  the  utilization  of  fossil  fuels  for  propulsion  (Scania 
2020). Decarbonization efforts are advancing in the road freight transport sector globally to keep 
in  line  with  the  Paris  Agreement  Goals.  For  instance,  the  Dutch  climate  agreement  plans  to 
implement zero emission zones in city centers in the Netherlands from 2025 to reduce the logistics 
carbon footprint by a total yearly CO2-reduction of 1 Mtonne in 2030 (Kin et al. 2021). Therefore, 
a fast transition to zero-emission freight vehicles is vital for decarbonization of the logistic sector 
and to keep in line with the emissions regulations placed globally. (ICCT 2022).  

Electric  trucks  (e-trucks)  represent  a  highly  viable  alternative  for  supply  chain 
decarbonization. 

The adoption of e-trucks by logistics sector can significantly decouple the reliance on fossil fuels 
especially  in  places  with  policies  that  support  the  reliance  on  greener  electricity  generation 
choices. According to ICCT (2023), transitioning to e-trucks would result in a drastic reduction of 
the  lifecycle  GHG  emissions  by  up  to  76%  considering  the  average  EU  electricity  mix.  The 
reduction in GHG emissions can further improve along with the improvement in the energy mix 
consisting of a higher percentage of electricity generated from renewable sources. 

Logistic actors need to have a broader understanding of impacts on overall sustainability 
arising from transitioning to e-trucks. 

Despite  these  emissions  benefits,  e-trucks,  like  internal  combustion  engine  (ICE)  trucks,  have 
associated environmental and social impacts across their lifecycle (Mowbray 2023). Therefore, to 
avoid impact shifting, it is crucial to ensure a transition that goes beyond just eliminating fossil 
fuel  emissions  but  acknowledges  the  social,  economic  and  environmental  dimension  as  well. 
Furthermore, it’s of utmost importance to track and mitigate the sustainability challenges across 
the  entire  lifecycle  of  the  vehicles  without  having  a  carbon  tunnel  vision  targeting  only  the 
operational phase of e-trucks. 

It’s  vital  to  understand  that  both  ICE  trucks  and  e-trucks  have  sustainability  impacts  across 
different  phases  within  the  truck’s  lifecycle.  Therefore,  a  broader  understanding  is  required  to 
identify and mitigate these sustainable challenges. For instance, concerning ICE trucks, the most 
substantial sustainability impacts occur downstream during the utilization phase, particularly from 
the combustion of fuels and upstream from the extraction, refining, and transportation of crude oil 
to produce liquid transportation fuel, as well as in the distribution of the refined fuel (CRS 2020). 
Long term dependency on the combustion of fossil fuel to power these ICE trucks have led to 
significant environmental, human and geopolitical consequences (Transport & Environment 2021, 
CRS 2020, O’Rourke & Connolly 2003). Conversely, the most crucial yet mitigable sustainability 
challenges are associated with the manufacturing and final life (End-of-Life) stage of an e-truck. 
For  instance,  the  energy-intensive  extraction  of  essential  materials  and  the  manufacturing  of 
batteries to power the e-truck powertrain pose various sustainability risks. Additionally, during the 
final  life  cycle  phase  of  the  e-truck,  the  disposal  and  treatment  of  batteries  present  unique 
environmental  challenges.  While  adopting  a  circularity  approach  for  handling  spent  e-truck 
batteries  is  considered  the  most  suitable  strategy,  it  comes  with  significant  economic  and 
technical challenges. 

This sustainability guidance report takes a triple-bottom line approach to highlight the mitigable 
sustainability challenges categorized under environmental, social and economic aspects that can 

                                                                                                                                   
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

be associated throughout the lifecycle of e-trucks, including electricity generation. Furthermore, it 
explores key strategies that can be implemented to mitigate these sustainability challenges.  

Implementing  strategies  to  mitigate  associated  challenges  is  the  key  to  an  overall 
sustainable transition within the road freight transport sector. 

Several practices within the manufacturing, operational and end of life (EoL) phase of e-trucks 
can be adopted to mitigate the environmental, social and economic challenges associated with 
e-trucks. For instance, implementing circularity within the value chain aids in addressing the 
sustainability issues arising from extraction of new raw materials. Circularity allows the 
minimization of issues related to disposal of batteries and reduces the need for raw materials, 
thereby mitigating the associated social, environmental and supply risks.  

The use of alternative sources for energy generation is key to further reducing the sustainability 
impacts from manufacturing and the operational phase of e-trucks. Technological advancement 
and optimization of fleet and battery use, further contribute to reducing impacts arising from all 
the three phases of e-trucks.  

Additionally, adhering to the legislative measures in place such as the European Union (EU) 
regulations and supply chain due diligence standards is another way to mitigate these broader 
sustainability challenges arising from the material sourcing of the required raw materials. 
Logistic actors should request for supply chain due diligence reports from the manufacturers to 
ensure the e-trucks procured comply to the sustainability standards. This will subsequently also 
give a signal to the market and stakeholders in the supply chain to progressively adhere to 
adequate sustainability standards and take action to mitigate issues arising from the up- and 
downstream activities in the e-truck materials supply chain. 

Logistic actors can maximize the sustainability benefits of e-trucks by prioritizing adoption in 
urban operations. A sustainable transition roadmap should prioritize specific regions for e-truck 
deployment where the energy mix comprises of a greater share from renewable sources to gain 
maximum benefits from the transition. 

What can you expect from this document?  

The  report  explores  mitigable  sustainability  challenges  and  solutions  categorized  under 
environmental, social and economic aspects that can be associated throughout the lifecycle of e-
trucks including electricity generation. In the section on environmental sustainability, the report 
thoroughly  examines  challenges  and  mitigation  strategies  at  key  stages  such  as  raw  material 
extraction,  processing,  component  and  e-truck  production,  vehicle  use  (considering  energy 
infrastructure and production impacts), and the end-of-life phase. Subsequently, the section on 
social  sustainability  identifies  potential  social  risks  associated  within  the  entire  battery  supply 
chain and suggests mitigation measures to eliminate these risks. In the final section of the report 
on economic sustainability, the focus is on strategies to tackle economic sustainability challenges 
and ways in which economic transformation can contribute to achieving environmental and social 
sustainability goals within the e-truck industry. 

The report adopts a cradle-to-grave perspective to highlight sustainability challenges and present 
mitigation  strategies  individually  for  both  the  vehicle  and  the  fuel  lifecycle  as  it  allows  for  the 
evaluation of the total environmental impact, including emissions, energy efficiency, and use of 
resource use, associated with different modes of transportation and energy sources. The vehicle 
lifecycle  refers  to  the  various  stages  a  vehicle  goes  through  from  its  initial  design  and 
manufacturing  to  its  eventual  disposal  or  recycling,  including  raw  material  extraction, 
manufacturing, use and end-of-life, as depicted in Figure 1.  

On the other hand, fuel lifecycle includes the complete life of a fuel source, from extraction or 
production to its eventual consumption and (if relevant) disposal. This includes the extraction or 
production, refinement and processing, distribution, storage and handling, consumption and end-
of-life  or  disposal.  It  also  involves  the  construction,  operation  and  dismantling  of  any  relevant 

                                                                                                                                   
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

infrastructure. In the case of electricity consumption for e-trucks, fuel lifecycle refers to all aspects 
related to the generation, distribution of electricity and the construction, operation and dismantling 
of electricity generation and distribution related facilities.   

Figure 1: E-trucks lifecycle and key stages involving sustainability issues. 

The document is designed in the form of an FAQ as to offer concrete guidance to key questions 
and concerns about sustainability in e-trucks from the different sustainability perspectives, as well 
as comparing them with ICE trucks where relevant.  

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

2  Environmental Sustainability 

This section aims to provide an objective examination of the environmental impacts associated 
with  the  lifecycle  of  e-trucks.  It  comprehensively  covers  key  lifecycle  stages,  including  raw 
material  extraction,  processing,  component  and  e-truck  production,  vehicle  use  (considering 
energy  infrastructure  and  production  impacts),  and  the  end-of-life  phase.  The  discussion  also 
highlights  potential  solutions  to  mitigate  environmental  risks  associated  with  e-trucks  and 
electricity production. Adopting a cradle-to-grave perspective ensures a thorough and genuinely 
environmentally sustainable transition to e-trucks, avoiding the perpetuation of issues, or creating 
new ones upstream or downstream. 

Overview 

2.1  What are the most energy-intensive stages of e-trucks lifecycle? 

The  lifecycle  stages  of  a  e-truck  include  the  production  phase,  comprising  extraction  of  raw 
materials,  manufacturing  and  any  transportation  or  distribution;  the  use  phase  which  includes 
electricity generation and distribution as well as charging of the vehicle and operations; and the 
end-of-life stage which comprises of all processes related to the decommissioning of the vehicle, 
such as re-selling, reuse, recycling and any waste management activities.   

A report by Transport & Environment (2021), analyses the energy requirements for the different 
lifecycle stages of an e-truck and establishes a comparison on the material requirements for diesel 
and e-trucks. As per the findings, the production of electricity for e-truck operation stands out as 
the most energy-intensive stage throughout its life cycle, comprising 60% of the overall energy 
consumption, as illustrated in Figure 2. Therefore, decarbonizing the electricity grid to which e-
trucks connect is crucial. Nevertheless, the emissions pales in comparison to the contribution of 
GHG emissions in the fuel production and consumption for a diesel truck.  

Figure 2: Breakdown of GHG Emissions for e-trucks & ICE trucks (Adapted from ICCT 
2023, McKinsey 2023b) 

Notably, battery manufacturing ranks as the second most carbon-intensive stage, accounting for 
over  25%  of  total  life  cycle  energy  consumption.  This  highlights  the  importance  of  addressing 
battery manufacturing to enhance energy efficiency and source energy from clean channels. The 

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

vehicle  production  phase,  particularly  steel  and  aluminium  manufacturing,  is  also  energy-
intensive,  representing  11%  of  total  life  cycle  energy  consumption.  Note  that  the  amount  of 
emissions in this category would be similar in the diesel truck. 

2.2  How does the lifecycle carbon footprint of e- trucks compare to that of traditional 

ICE trucks? 

A  comprehensive  cradle-to-grave  analysis  of  GHG  emissions  is  imperative  to  facilitate  a  fair 
comparison  of  the  lifecycle  GHG  emissions  of  ICE  and  e-trucks.  This  analysis  encompasses 
emissions from all three stages of the truck’s lifecycle, namely upstream emissions from vehicle 
manufacturing and energy production, emissions from the vehicle use phase, and the eventual 
recovery of vehicles. The sustainability of e-trucks in each region is significantly influenced by the 
type of energy mix prevalent in that specific geography (ICCT 2023; Scania 2020).  

According to an analysis by ICCT (2023), transitioning from diesel to electric powertrains yields 
substantial reductions in GHG emissions, even when considering the EU average electricity mix. 
Throughout their lifecycle, e-trucks currently in production exhibit a 63% to 76% reduction in life 
cycle GHG emissions compared to the present best-in-class diesel trucks. The decarbonization 
and enhancement of the electricity grid can further augment the GHG emission reduction of e-
trucks to a range of 84-92% (100% renewable energy scenario). These reductions stem from the 
heightened  energy  efficiency  of  e-trucks  and  the  decreased  carbon  intensity  of  the  average 
electricity mix in contrast to diesel. 

Despite the overall emissions advantage of e-trucks, it is essential to acknowledge that they may 
incur a production debt in terms of GHG emissions relative to ICE trucks as shown in figure 2. 
This  arises  from  the  energy-intensive  nature  of  battery  production.  However,  e-trucks 
demonstrate the potential to outperform ICE trucks in terms of GHG emissions as the GHG break-
even point is typically reached within one or two years of operation (considering electricity mix of 
EU 2020 & EU 2030). (Scania 2020) 

Mining and extraction of key minerals and metals  

2.3  What are the main environmental issues associated with mining and extraction of 

key minerals in e-trucks? 

Mining is a key activity in the lifecycle of e-trucks, as various minerals and metals are required for 
their production. These are essential for the manufacturing of batteries, electric motors and other 
components. Some of the significant minerals and metals used in e-trucks include lithium, cobalt, 
nickel and manganese, which are used in the manufacturing of the batteries; rare elements and 
copper for the electric motor; and steel and aluminum for manufacturing of the e-truck body.  

The  mining  and  extraction  processes  of  raw  materials  used  in  e-trucks  give  rise  to  several 
environmental concerns such as local pollution of air, water & soil, the depletion of vital resources 
like water, biodiversity loss, and the generation of hazardous waste (Zimmermann 2023; GBA 
and WEF 2019; McKinsey 2023a).  

Moreover, specific raw materials used in e-truck production introduce additional environmental 
challenges. For instance, manganese mining involves extensive land utilization and the emission 
of airborne contaminants (GBA and WEF 2019). In the case of nickel, its extraction entails the 
management of acid in leaching processes, which poses a distinct risk.  

Due to the scarcity of certain minerals and metals, there is an anticipation that mining activities 
may extend beyond terrestrial operations in the future. As suggested by GBA and WEF (2019), 
deep seabed mining is expected to become a more widespread practice in the coming decade. 
While this could potentially mitigate some of the challenges associated with terrestrial mining, it 
also raises concerns about its impact on the ocean's ability to sequester CO2, in addition to other 
potential, yet undiscovered issues. 

                                                                                                                                   
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

2.4  What are the most critical sustainability issues associated with key materials 

required for e-trucks? 

The most critical sustainability issues for cobalt, lithium, nickel and manganese, which are all key 
components for the manufacture of e-trucks, are summarized in Table 1. The list is not exhaustive 
and intends to point out the issues that are hardest to address particular to each material. 

Lithium and nickel, due to their geographical concentration, present supply chain risks that can 
potentially result in disruptions or high prices. Cobalt mining is also related to important social and 
governance  issues  in  Congo,  where  most  of  world  resources  are  to  be  found  and  where 
precarious  mining  sites  and  informal  working  conditions  affect  local  populations  (European 
Commission 2023b; GBA and WEF 2019). 

This section of the report covers the related environmental issues while the economic and social 
issues, also reflected in the table, are addressed in detail in later sections of the FAQ. 

Table 1: Summary of sustainability issues for key metals in e-trucks (Goldman Sachs 
2022) 

2.5 

Is mining more impactful for ICE trucks or e-trucks? 

The  mining  and  processing  stages  differ  significantly  for  ICE  and  e-trucks.  In  the  case  of  ICE 
trucks, the mining phase is primarily focused on extracting the fuel needed for vehicle operation. 
Conversely,  e-trucks  necessitate  the  extraction  of  specific  materials  essential  for  battery 
manufacturing, with the potential for recycling or repurposing these materials as raw inputs for 
new vehicles. 

Presently, e-trucks exhibit greater environmental impacts during the mining phase compared to 
ICE  trucks.  This  is  due  to  the  well-established  nature  of  the  fossil  fuel  industry,  which  has 
optimized  fuel  extraction  processes.  Even  though  ICE  trucks  involve  the  extraction  of  more 
substantial quantities of materials through mining, e-trucks tend to have higher lifecycle impacts 
related to acidification, human toxicity, particulate matter emissions, and resource depletion (Del 
Pero, Delogu, and Pierini 2018). 

Despite of this, ongoing research anticipates a shift in this dynamic over time. As mining activities 
related to e-truck production become more streamlined and efficient, and recycling practices for 
e-trucks components get to be more widespread and effective, it is expected that material demand 
will  gradually  diminish.  This  transition  is  expected  to  contribute  to  a  reduction  in  the  overall 
environmental impact of e-trucks in the long term. 

                                                                                                                                   
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

2.6  What are solutions to identify and minimize environmental impacts of mining and 

extraction? 

Solutions to the issues mentioned in this chapter include identifying and minimizing environmental 
impacts, following a consistent approach and adhering to international standards. An illustrative 
example  is  the  Environmental,  Social  &  Corporate  Governance  (ESG)  Standard  for  Minerals 
Supply  Chains  (Responsible  Minerals  Initiative  2021).  This  framework  proposes  a  set  of 
measures to prevent or minimize these concerns such as:  

•  providing relevant training for workers and managers  
• 
• 

the establishment of corrective and preventive action protocols 
the  sourcing  of  materials  exclusively  from  mines  independently  evaluated  against  global 
standards. 
the implementation of tailored measures for specific issues like water and soil pollution 

• 
•  and the enhancement of waste management practices on mining sites. 

Furthermore, an additional approach to tackle environmental issues linked to mining is to reduce 
mining activities by adopting circularity principles (GBA and WEF 2019). This can be achieved by 
enhancing  the  traceability  of  materials,  for  instance,  implementing  mechanisms  like  battery 
passports, and by creating appropriate market incentives and regulatory frameworks to promote 
and implement recycling practices. 

Processing and Manufacturing  

2.7  What are emissions levels from steel and aluminum manufacturing, and what 
viable decarbonization solutions are being explored within these industries? 

Steel and aluminum exert a notable influence on the GHG emissions throughout the vehicle life 
cycle, in the context of both diesel and e-trucks. In diesel trucks, steel production is the primary 
contributor  to  emissions  arising  from  vehicle  manufacturing.  Conversely,  in  e-trucks,  materials 
associated with lithium-ion batteries (including cathode, anode, aluminum, and battery assembly) 
exhibit  the  highest  GHG  emissions  accounting  for  upto  35%  to  50%  of  the  material  carbon 
footprint of an e-truck. (Iyer et al. 2023, Billy & Müller 2023) 

A study by Iyer et al. (2023), illustrates that aluminum accounts for an outsized share of impact 
on the vehicle cycle emissions compared to steel because of its highly energy- and GHG-intensive 
production.  Consequently,  OEMs  must  carefully  evaluate  the  consequential  increase  in  GHG 
emissions  resulting  from  the  substitution  of  steel  with  aluminum,  a  practice  aimed  at 
manufacturing lightweight and fuel-efficient medium and heavy-duty vehicles. Furthermore, truck 
manufacturers can optimize vehicle design to necessitate less material, thereby diminishing the 
demand for steel and aluminum manufacturing. (Iyer et al. 2023; WEF 2020c; 2020a) 

Manufacturers  of  steel  and  aluminum  can  contribute  to  emission  mitigation  efforts  by  either 
enhancing  the  proportion  of  recycled  content  in  their  materials  or  by  adopting  more  energy-
efficient  production  methods,  possibly  through  redesigning  fuel  systems.  Another  avenue  for 
emission reduction involves the implementation of Carbon Capture and Storage coupled with low-
carbon biomass and replacement of coking coal with hydrogen or green electricity. Additionally, 
technical solutions, such as substituting carbon anode with inert anode in aluminum production, 
hold promise for diminishing emissions stemming from aluminum manufacturing. (WEF 2020c; 
2020a) 

Lastly, a study by Iyer et al. (2023) concludes the impact of frequent battery replacement on e-
truck’s vehicle-cycle impacts. Advancements in battery technology and the adoption of optimal 
operational strategies for e-trucks can substantially reduce the frequency of battery replacements 

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

required during the e-truck’s lifecycle thereby enhancing the overall environmental outcomes in 
the vehicle life cycle.  

2.8  What are measures to reduce emissions related to battery manufacturing? 

Electricity  produces  half  of  emissions  related  to  battery  manufacturing,  as  the  electrode 
production and cell assembly processes are very energy intensive. Thus, it becomes critical to 
decarbonize the grid to achieve improvements. With the prospective development of renewable 
energy generation, emissions for battery manufacturing are expected to be 17% lower by 2030 
according to (ICCT 2018). 

Alternative measures to mitigate the environmental impacts of batteries also include (EEA 2018; 
WEF 2020c): 

•  Using battery capacity that is appropriate for the expected driving range (as larger batteries 
involve  greater  impacts).  This  will  be  facilitated  by  an  increasingly  denser  charging 
infrastructure. 

•  Enhancing battery technology and opting for battery types that offer higher energy densities 

and longer life cycle expectancy. 

•  Manufacturing  for  energy  efficiency  by  making  use  of  economies  of  scale  in  battery 

production. 

Electricity Production & Use 

2.9  What are the environmental issues related to energy infrastructure and electricity 

production? 

Similar  to  environmental  issues  within  the  ICE  trucks  in  terms  of  oil  exploration,  refining  and 
distribution, there are a range of relevant issues within the e-truck ecosystem linked to energy 
infrastructure and electricity production, from a life-cycle perspective. Most relevant issues for the 
different sources of energy comprise: 

•  Mining/raw materials/fuel production: There are important issues linked to the materials 
needed to build energy infrastructure. Examples would be the use of rare earth materials in 
motors  and  of  cobalt  in  wind  turbines  (Zimmermann  2023).  These  would  be  similar  to  the 
issues for the mining of materials for electric batteries mentioned earlier. For fossil-fuel based 
energy production, there are issues linked to crude oil, such as mining and risks of spilling. 
When burning biofuels, potential issues could include land use change, resource depletion, 
soil and ecosystem degradation, or labor issues.  

•  Construction  of  power  generation  infrastructure  may  have  impacts  on  natural  habitats 
and biodiversity, such as loss of habitats (hydropower), modification or fragmentation (wind, 
solar farms). (UNDP Serbia 2010; EERE 2023) 

•  Power  generation:  There  can  be  associated  GHG  emissions  and  air  pollution  from  fuel 
combustion, in the case of fossil-based generation technologies – for example, the smog from 
coal power plants. Power generation in many cases also has a water footprint, for example, 
in steam generation or cooling systems that are common to many energy sources.  

•  Decommissioning: The main environmental concerns associated with the decommissioning 
of  power  plants,  regardless  of  their  type,  include  managing  residual  pollutants  from  the 
operational phase, legacy pollution from the operational phase, managing hazardous waste 
materials, preventing water and soil contamination, minimizing land disturbance and habitat 
disruption, and controlling emissions during dismantling. 

                                                                                                                                   
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

2.10  How does additional demand created by charging e-trucks affect the carbon 

content of the grid (marginal emissions)? 

The term marginal emissions refers to the amount of additional GHG emissions or other pollutants 
produced as a result of a specific change in energy or resource consumption. These emissions 
represent  the  incremental  environmental  impact  associated  with  increasing  or  decreasing  a 
particular activity, such as using an additional unit of electricity or fuel or producing an extra unit 
of goods or services. 

It is important to consider that the composition of the electricity mix on the grid is intimately tied 
to its demand patterns. When introducing the charging of e-trucks into this equation, it can either 
escalate or diminish emissions stemming from electricity generation, depending on if the charging 
happens in periods of low or high demand. For instance, if e-truck charging predominantly occurs 
during periods of low electricity demand, it can absorb surplus capacity generated by renewable 
sources. This results in an overall greener grid mix because it maximizes the use of clean energy 
sources.  Conversely,  if  e-truck  charging  aligns  with  high-demand  periods,  it  can  exacerbate 
demand peaks, leading to increased reliance on natural gas power units and subsequent carbon 
emissions. Consequently, the concept of marginal emissions becomes particularly significant in 
situations  where  e-truck  charging  practices  either  align  with  or  counteract  prevailing  demand 
dynamics. 

To  address  these  challenges  and  optimize  the  environmental  benefits  of  e-truck  adoption,  it's 
imperative to promote flexible charging practices. This approach allows us to harness low-carbon 
electricity  when  it's  abundant  and  prevents  the  creation  or  worsening  of  demand  peaks.  This 
aligns with the recommendations of the European Environment Agency (EEA) in 2018. 

Furthermore, there are additional strategies to consider that would increase the sustainability of 
power generation and transmission. These encompass enhancing grid infrastructure, including 
enhancing  the  grid  energy  storage  capacity  and  achieving  better  grid  integration.  Additionally, 
implementing practices like battery swapping allows for charging that is disconnected from vehicle 
usage, and optimizing battery capacity to match actual travel needs—avoiding unnecessary over-
sizing—further enhances the sustainable use of the vehicles. 

2.11  Which energy source options for electricity production are more sustainable from 

a broader sustainability perspective? How can this be measured? 

To standardize the way different environmental impacts affect electricity production, the United 
Nations  Economic  Commission  for  Europe  (UNECE)  proposes  16  categories  of  impacts  with 
corresponding units of measurement and guidance for their calculation (UNECE 2022). These 
impact categories include use of minerals and metals, water use, particular matter, human toxicity, 
among others.   

Figure 3 presents a summary of the normalized environmental impacts corresponding to 1 TWh 
of electricity for the different categories, enabling a comparison of the main electricity generation 
options.  

                                                                                                                                   
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Figure 3: Normalized, weighted, environmental impacts of the generation of 1 TWh of 
electricity (UNECE 2022) 
Note: Consider this figure for illustrative purposes only. 

Based on the analysis, it can be concluded that fossil fuels have the highest environmental impact, 
even when considering broader impacts beyond just GHG emissions. In contrast, low carbon and 
renewable energy sources display an overall reduced environmental impact. 

Among the options with lower environmental impacts are nuclear energy, photovoltaic (PV) solar, 
and wind power. This suggests that these sources are more appropriate for ensuring sustainable 
electricity  production.  However,  it's  important  to  note  that  each  of  these  sources  has  its  own 
unique challenges: 

•  Nuclear Energy: While nuclear energy offers low environmental impact, it faces constraints 
such as high initial costs, lengthy construction timelines, security concerns, public perception 
issues, and regulatory complexities. 

•  PV Solar and Wind Power: These sources are generally more accessible and environmentally 
friendly.  However,  they  do  encounter  challenges  related  to  intermittency,  which  may 
necessitate additional power generation, the integration of technologies with more consistent 
output, or advancements in energy storage solutions to ensure a reliable energy supply. 

In summary, while low carbon and renewable energy sources like nuclear, PV solar, and wind 
show promise for sustainable electricity production, each has its unique set of obstacles that must 
be addressed for their effective and widespread adoption. 

2.12  What mechanisms can be used to evaluate the sustainability attributes of the 

electricity purchased and what do they include? 

transmission,  distribution,  and  retail  entities 

The Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) Electric Utilities Sector Disclosures offers a framework for 
to  assess  economic, 
power  generation, 
environmental, and social sustainability facets of electricity generation. Additionally, the Carbon 
Disclosure  Project  (CDP)  reports  provide  a  means  to  evaluate  a  company's  environmental 
performance and its social impacts across a spectrum of topics, including the adoption and effects 
of e-trucks in their operations. 

Beyond the documentation on the sustainability attributes of the electricity purchased, companies 
can directly invest in and procure renewable electricity generation. According to Smart Freight 
Centre  (2024),  the  primary  approaches  for  doing  so  include  on-site  or  “behind-the-meter” 

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

generation, power purchase agreements, green tariffs and green power products, as well as other 
energy attribute certificates.  

Finally, Guarantees of Origin (GoOs) or Renewable Energy Certificates serve as tools to enhance 
the environmental sustainability of purchased electricity. They allow to sell low emission attributes 
separate from the electricity delivered from the grid and are used to directly finance investment in 
renewable  electricity  production.  GoOs  typically  provide  details  about  the  specific  renewable 
energy  source,  the  location  of  the  generating  facility,  and  the  amount  of  electricity  produced. 
However, they don´t provide information on broader sustainability issues. 

2.13  How can the use of e-trucks impact noise, air pollution and safety? 

E-trucks offer significant advantages over ICE trucks, including reduced noise levels that enhance 
driver well-being and contribute to lower noise pollution. Moreover, e-trucks demonstrate benefits 
in  local  pollution  within  urban  areas  by  producing  no  exhaust  emissions.  Additionally,  their 
superior energy efficiency, attributed to higher efficiency of electric powertrain comparatively and 
regenerative braking, sets them apart from ICE trucks (Ricardo 2021).  

However,  these  advantages  come  with  certain  drawbacks.  While  low  noise  levels  are 
advantageous at lower speeds, the friction between the e-trucks and the road generates noise 
pollution at higher speeds that is comparable to that of ICE vehicles. In urban settings, the minimal 
noise levels can pose a safety risk for pedestrians accustomed to the audible cues of traditional 
vehicle engines. 

Furthermore, the increased weight of e-trucks, primarily due to the weight of the battery (14% to 
29% higher than ICE vehicles), contributes to elevated emissions from tire-road friction, partially 
offsetting the air pollution benefits. This increase is particularly notable in particulate matter (PM) 
emissions and the resuspension of road dust. (EEA 2018) 

Addressing the safety concerns related to noise involves the implementation of "Acoustic Vehicle 
Alerting Systems" (AVAS) to mitigate potential risks for pedestrians in urban areas, as outlined 
by  the  EEA  (EEA  2018).  EU  legislation,  specifically  EU  Regulation  2017/1576,  mandates  the 
incorporation  of  AVAS  as  a  requirement  for  electric  and  hybrid  vehicles  in  the  EU  (European 
Commission 2019).  

To  reduce  tire  emissions,  potential  solutions  include  opting  for  low  rolling  resistance  tires, 
implementing  weight  reductions  through  advancements  in  battery  technology,  and  favoring 
lightweight vehicle design. These measures aim to mitigate the challenges posed by noise and 
emissions in the transition to e-trucks. 

Environmental Sustainability: End of Life 

2.14  What are EoL options for batteries of e-trucks? Which EoL option should be 

preferred under what circumstances? 

According to Börner et al. (2022), there are four possibilities for the EoL  batteries from a circularity 
perspective. These are summarized in Table 2: End of Life Options for electric batteries from a 
circularity perspective (Börner et al. 2022). 

Table 2: End of Life Options for electric batteries from a circularity perspective (Börner et 
al. 2022) 

EoL Option   

Definition  

Conditions under which EoL option is 
most suitable 

Reuse  

Reuse without additional works in the 
original application 

If the battery still retains a significant portion of its 
original capacity and functionality, it can be reused 

                                                                                                                                   
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Remanufacturing   Remanufacturing for batteries is a process 

Repurpose  

in which used or worn-out batteries are 
restored to a like-new condition, allowing 
them to be reused instead of being 
discarded. 

Refurbishment of the battery and use in a 
new type of application. Second-life 
applications can include stationary energy 
storage for renewable energy systems, 
backup power, or grid stabilization. 

in another vehicle. This option is best when the 
battery's degradation is minimal. 

This option is the most suitable when only certain 
components of the battery are damaged. 

If the battery retains some of its original capacity 
and functionality, repurposing it in a less demanding 
second-life application can be an environmentally 
and economically favorable option. 

Recycling 

The recycling process involves recovering 
and processing valuable materials like 
lithium, cobalt, nickel, and other metals. 

It is a good EoL option for batteries that have 
significantly degraded and can no longer be used 
effectively in EVs or second-life applications. 

From  a  circularity  perspective,  it  can  be  observed  that  in  the  reuse,  remanufacturing  and 
repurpose options the battery re-enters the use loop. At the same time, for recycling the battery 
does not come back to a second use phase, but just the materials are recovered.  

In  addition  to  the  four  EoL  possibilities  mentioned,  a  fifth  EoL  option  would  be  the  disposal  of 
batteries. This is a highly unrecommended option, presenting important risks due to the highly 
polluting substances that landfilled batteries may release. Additionally, disposal of batteries will 
lead  to  loss  of  valuable  materials  requiring  new  mining  activities  to  take  place  to  obtain  the 
required minerals for battery production. Existing regulations, such as Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 
of  the  European  Parliament  pertaining  to  batteries  and  waste  batteries  sets  minimum  rates  of 
recycling  of  materials  and  explicitly  prohibit  the  disposal  of  batteries  (European  Commission 
2023b). 

2.15  What are main EoL challenges from a circularity perspective (assuming batteries 

are not to be disposed of)? 

The major EoL challenges from a circularity perspective are summarized in Table 3: Main EoL 
challenges for batteries from a circularity perspective (GBA and WEF 2019; Börner et al. 2022) 

Table 3: Main EoL challenges for batteries from a circularity perspective (GBA and WEF 
2019; Börner et al. 2022) 

EoL Option 

Reuse / Repurpose 
/Refurbish 

Challenges 

Lack of information on battery health. User data would be needed for evaluation, with the 
restriction that details of battery design, BMS hard- and software are confidential. This 
hinders the reincorporation of the battery to a second life purpose, (either it is reuse, 
repurpose or remanufacturing).  

Reuse 

•  High transaction costs to be equalized by low prices of new batteries. 

• 

• 

• 

Thermal events and diminished performance are more subject to occur to reused 
batteries. 

Same requirements expected as in first life in terms of safety and liability, with lack of 
adapted homologation test for second use. 

Technical complexity: electrical, thermal, mechanical, ageing. All are linked and need 
to be addressed to ensure quality standards are met. 

                                                                                                                                   
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Recycling 

• 

• 

Economic viability. Recycling is capital intensive, and costs could be higher than the 
value of recovered materials. 

Lack of infrastructure: Establishing the necessary infrastructure and facilities for 
recycling demands substantial investments in specialized resources. Collection and 
logistics infrastructure are also complex and need to be addressed.  

•  Complex battery composition that needs to be effectively separated and processed. 

This process is complex and costly. 

• 

Environmental and safety concerns: Battery recycling involves handling hazardous 
materials, including toxic chemicals and flammable substances. Ensuring proper 
safety measures, complying with environmental regulations, and managing potential 
risks associated with the recycling process are critical but can pose barriers due to the 
complexity and costs involved. 

2.16  What are the solutions that address environmental challenges arising from 
batteries reaching its EoL? How can logistic actors aid in mitigating these 
challenges? 

a.  Operational Measures  

Planning  and  scheduling  of  e-truck  operations,  in  a  way  that  optimizes  battery  cycles  can 
significantly  contribute  to  mitigating  environmental  sustainability  challenges.  Additionally, 
strategic  operational measures by logistic actors,  that result in optimal battery life and  optimal 
utilization of power, can further aid in mitigating environmental risks. This is due to the reduction 
in  the  number  of  batteries  and  power  required  over  the  e-truck’s  lifetime  comparatively,  that 
results  in  a  reduction  in  the  GHG  emissions  of  e-trucks  arising  from  additional  battery 
manufacturing,  vehicle  utilization  and  EoL  phase.  These  measures  include  the  selection  of 
appropriate battery technology, optimal battery capacity, awareness of factors influencing battery 
life, and route optimization. 

b.  Legislations & Initiatives 

The Battery Passport initiative introduced by the Global Battery Alliance ensures transparency 
throughout the battery lifecycle, encompassing critical information pertaining to the state of health 
of batteries used in e-trucks (GBA and WEF 2019). In tandem with this initiative, the Regulation 
(EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament pertaining to batteries and waste batteries, mandates 
the implementation of a battery passport for all EVs. These regulatory measures and collaborative 
initiatives facilitate effective EoL decision-making processes for retired batteries, ensuring their 
judicious utilization in second-life applications and preventing unwarranted disposal. Furthermore, 
the regulation explicitly prohibits the disposal of waste batteries, thereby promoting environmental 
sustainability within the electric vehicle (EV) sector. Additionally, the regulation sets recycling and 
recovery targets, alongside stipulating minimum quantities of recycled materials for integration 
into  the  manufacturing  of  new  batteries.  (European  Commission  2023b)  The  adhesion  to  this 
framework  would  ensure  a  certain  degree  of  circularity  within  the  ecosystem,  effectively 
addressing environmental sustainability challenges arising from retired e-truck batteries.  

2.17  How should one report lifecycle GHG emissions for e-trucks according to the GHG 

Protocol? 

Companies reporting the lifecycle GHG emissions of e-truck-based operations must differentiate 
between the GHG emissions produced in the vehicle cycle (including the charging equipment) 
and the emissions from the energy cycle. The emission categories are divided into Scope 2 and 
different  subcategories  under  Scope  3.  Generally,  Scope  2  emissions  fall  under  mandatory 
reporting, while Scope 3 emissions are optional. Figure 4 summarizes the stages of e-trucks life 
cycle where emissions should be reported, together with the scopes this should be reported under 
for truck owners and purchasers of logistics services.  

                                                                                                                                   
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

PRODUCTION

USE PHASE

END-OF-LIFE

Extraction

Transportation

Manufacture/ 
Production

Fuel production

Power 
Generation

Power 
Distribution

Scope 3 
Category 2

Fleet owner

Service buyer

Scope 3
Category 3

Scope 2

Scope 3
Category 3

Scope 3
Category 4 /9

Vehicle 
Re-sold

Scope 3 
Category 11

Waste 
management

Scope 3 
Category 12

Figure 4: GHG emissions in the life cycle of e-trucks 

It is not common practice for fleet owners to disclose the emissions related to the production and 
end-of-life stages of the vehicle lifecycle, hence the following describes the interpretation of the 
written Scope 3 standards.  

§  Asset production: Scope 3 Category 2 “Capital Goods” includes all extraction, production 
and transportation activities within the vehicle and charging equipment product lifecycle. 
§  Asset end-of-life: Scope 3 Category 11 “Use of sold products” includes “direct use-phase 

emissions of sold products over their expected lifetime” of vehicles resold in the secondhand 
market. Scope 3 Category 12 “End-of-life treatment of sold products” would comprise 
emissions from end-of-life treatments by waste management companies in case the vehicle 
or parts of them are recycled or disposed of. 

The emissions from the electricity lifecycle are disclosed by the Electric Vehicle (EV) operator and 
buyer of EV services according to Table 4 (Smart Freight Centre 2024). 

Table 4: Emissions reporting for EV operations based on GHG Protocol 

Reporting firm 

Emission category 

Buyer of EV services  Scope 3 Category 4 and 9 only includes the amount of scope 2 emissions reported by carrier. 

EV operator 

Scope 2 for emission from power generation, that is emissions from fuel combustion at the 
power plant. For instance, the emission of solar power, wind and hydropower is zero.  

EV operator 

Scope 3 Category 3 from  

§  Fuel production, i.e., emissions from the extraction, production, and transportation of fuel. 

§  Transmission and distribution losses, i.e., the Scope 2 emissions allocated to the electricity 

lost in transmission and distribution 

Note that the ISO 14083 “Greenhouse gases — Quantification and reporting of greenhouse gas 
emissions arising from transport chain operations” despite being aligned with the GHG Protocol 
differs  in  several  aspects,  such  as  the  definition  of  electricity  lifecycle  and  the  reporting 
obligations. These are discussed in detail in the whitepaper providing guidance on how to apply 
the ISO 14083 to EVs (Smart Freight Centre 2024).  

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

3  Social Sustainability 

To  ensure  a  holistic  transition,  it  is  crucial  to  go  beyond  addressing  only  the  environmental 
sustainability aspect and recognize the social dimension. This helps prevent the shift of impact 
where trade-offs disadvantaging communities are made on behalf of the environment. Much like 
their traditional counterparts, e-trucks are associated with social sustainability risks that can be 
mitigated. Yet e-trucks also contribute significantly to fostering a positive impact on the job market 
which’s assessed in a study undertaken by Transport & Environment (2023). Subsequently, the 
section  illuminates  various  solutions  and  practices  that  logistics  stakeholders  can  adopt  to 
address  these  risks,  ensuring  a  sustainable  transition  within  the  road  freight  transport  sector. 
These mitigation solutions encompass the entire e-truck battery supply chain to promote social 
sustainability throughout the e-truck lifecycle.  

3.1  What are the anticipated changes in the demand for specific materials crucial for 

EVs and renewable electricity production, and what is done to address sustainable 
sourcing shortages?  

Due  to  the  fast  development  of  the  EVs  and  renewable  electricity  production  markets,  whose 
technologies require specific minerals for the construction of electronic components, there has 
been a scale up of raw material sourcing for certain minerals. The upward trend in production is 
anticipated to persist in the coming years, projecting an increase in demand for lithium sourcing 
up  to  36kt,  cobalt  sourcing  up  to  21kt  and  nickel  up  to  276kt  by  the  year  2030.  (Transport  & 
Environment 2021). 

Due to the concentration of production of some of these minerals in certain regions, there is a risk 
of disruption and projected imbalances which make it difficult to address the increased demand 
sustainably.  Some  countries  or  regions  envision  taking  measures  to  address  these  demand 
shortages and secure sourcing of raw materials. For example, under the Critical Raw Materials 
Act, Europe is considering opening new mining sites and lowering environmental and ecosystem 
restrictions for mining, as it is expected that the environmental benefits from clean energy would 
compensate for those sustainability issues. (European Commission 2023a) 

3.2  What are the social sustainability issues associated with sourcing of raw material? 

Various  social  sustainability  issues  significantly  impact  the  sourcing  of  raw  materials,  with  a 
particular emphasis on the cobalt supply chain. These issues include child labour, forced labour 
and  unsafe  working  conditions  (European  Commission  2023b).  The  lack  of  safe  working 
conditions not only exposes workers to fine dust and particulates but also poses risks of DNA-
damaging toxicity and, in cases of poorly secured tunnels, even fatalities. Additionally, violations 
of  indigenous  rights  and  labor  laws  may  occur,  giving  rise  to  governance  issues  such  as 
corruption, bribery, funding of armed conflicts, and tax evasion (McKinsey 2023a). These issues 
are exacerbated by the conditions of extreme poverty and vulnerability of local populations.  

3.3  What initiatives and frameworks are in place to address social sustainability 

challenges in the e-truck value chain, and how can logistic actors take advantage 
of them?  

Many initiatives, both public and private, are in place to address and alleviate social sustainability 
challenges within the e-truck value chain. This section discusses a few of them and highlights 
ways in which logistic actors can align with these initiatives.  

Noteworthy among these are both local and international regulatory frameworks and standards, 
exemplified by the OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals 

                                                                                                                                   
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas (OECD 2016) and Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the 
European  Parliament  pertaining  to  batteries  and  waste  batteries.  These  directives  are 
strategically  oriented  towards  the  responsible  sourcing  of  raw  materials,  imposing  a  set  of 
obligations  on  Original  Equipment  Manufacturers  (OEMs).  These  obligations  include  the 
establishment  of  robust  company  management  systems,  identification  of  supply  chain  risks, 
formulation  and  implementation  of  risk  mitigation  strategies,  independent  third-party  audits  of 
supply  chain  due  diligence  from  suppliers,  and  comprehensive  reporting  on  supply  chain  due 
diligence (OECD 2016). Furthermore, these regulations will mandate traceability within the value 
chain and articulate recycling and recovery targets within the upcoming years which would reduce 
social sustainability challenges arising from new mining activities (European Commission 2023b)  

In parallel, various private sector initiatives and consortiums actively engage in mitigating social 
sustainability  concerns  emanating  from  raw  material  sourcing  in  the  e-truck  domain.  These 
include  the  Initiative  for  Responsible  Mining  Assurance,  Responsible  Minerals  Initiative  (RMI), 
Responsible Minerals Assurance Process, Responsible Cobalt Initiative, Drive Sustainability & 
European  Commission  Partnership,  and  the  Global  Battery  Alliance's  Battery  Passport.  These 
initiatives  lay  standards  aligned  with  international  benchmarks  for  the  responsible  sourcing  of 
materials, conduct independent or third-party audits, provide digital tools for self-assessment of 
mining activities, and promote transparency within the battery value chain.  

Logistic actors are well-advised to procure their e-truck fleets exclusively from OEMs that adhere 
to  the  supply  chain  due  diligence  regulations  and  standards  stipulated  by  the  aforementioned 
public sector initiatives, which are expressly designed to address and mitigate social sustainability 
issues within the e-truck battery value chain. Furthermore, logistic actors may find it prudent to 
consider  procuring  their  fleets  exclusively  from  e-truck  manufacturers  that  have  contractual 
agreements  with  battery  suppliers  mandating  the  procurement  of  raw  materials  solely  from 
sources audited by the aforementioned private sector initiatives. 

3.4  Which stakeholders in the supply chain should hold responsibility for issues 

related to raw material sourcing? 

As  depicted  in  Figure  5,  the  assurance  standards  landscape  by  RMI  covers  the  entire  supply 
chain,  from  mining  companies  to  final  user  companies.  This  emphasizes  the  fact  that  all 
stakeholders in the supply chain should hold responsibility for issues incurred in the sourcing of 
raw materials and request appropriate action from their suppliers.   

                                                                                                                                   
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Figure 5: Responsible Minerals Initiative -Assurance Standards Landscape for the 
Minerals Supply Chain (Responsible Minerals Initiative n.d.) 

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

4  Economic Sustainability 

The  future  trajectory  of  e-trucks  is  significantly  influenced  by  economic  sustainability, 
necessitating wise decisions and advancements for market viability. This section delves into the 
economic  challenges  that  needs  to  be  addressed  in  the  e-truck  industry,  to  accelerate  the 
transition from conventional to e-trucks. Additionally, it underscores strategies to address these 
economic  sustainability  challenges  and  ways  in  which  economic  transformation  can  aid  in 
attainment of environmental and social sustainability goals within the e-truck industry. 

4.1  What are the major economic sustainability challenges that affect e-trucks from 

the OEM’s perspective? 

The major economic sustainability challenges that affect e-trucks from the OEM’s perspective are 
summarized in Table 5. 

Table 5: Economic sustainability challenges that affect e-trucks from the OEMs 
perspective. (GBA and WEF 2019; McKinsey 2023a). 

Lack of charging 
infrastructure and low 
utilization of existing 
infrastructure 

Limited customer 
acceptance 

Supply chain risks 

Unclear business 
case for circularity 

Volatility of energy 
and materials price 

Large scale 
investment and 
economies of scale 
needed 

The “chicken-egg” situation, also mentioned as part of the OEMs challenges, affects 
the macro-economics of the BE market. The necessary infrastructure is not in place 
for a stronger e-truck market to develop while at the same time, the under-utilization 
of existing infrastructure hinders further investment in infrastructure. 

E-trucks are not completely accepted in the market because of several reasons, 
including limitations in range and charging infrastructure, lower payload capacity, 
higher upfront costs and limited model availability. 

There are important risks of disruption for some of the raw materials that are key to 
the production of batteries. This is the case of Lithium, Cobalt, rare earth elements 
and Nickel. 

Recycling of batteries, which will be mandated by the regulation in the upcoming 
year, is an expensive process and there is no clear business case for the re-
incorporation of batteries in their 2nd life, especially in competition with newer 
upgraded battery technologies. 

The difficult prevision of prices for raw materials and energy creates a situation of 
uncertainty that makes decision-making and investment in e-truck manufacturing 
difficult if no appropriate regulatory measures in place. 

The e-truck market and technology are still at a developing stage. Large scale 
investments would be key to reach the required economies of scale. 

Changing national 
regulations & lack of 
incentives 

Changing national regulations and a diversified picture in terms of government 
support to the development of a market for e-trucks create an uneven playing field for 
stakeholders in different regions. Lack of sufficient incentives and subsidies for the 
development of a still relatively costly technology 

4.2  What are the main solutions to existing economic and supply chain challenges 

that affect e-trucks? 

From the OEM’s perspective there is a range of solutions to the aforementioned problems, which 
include  vertical  supply-chain  integration  and  long-term  contracts,  greater  collaboration  among 
stakeholders,  innovation  in  productivity,  and  cost  optimization.  Simultaneously,  flexibility  in 
requirements and clear signals about long-term demand from the purchaser's side would greatly 
facilitate planning and cost optimization efforts for the OEMs. 

                                                                                                                                   
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

From the macro-economic viewpoint, open dialogue and communication between stakeholders 
to  support  the  battery  industry  would  be  important  to  overcome  many  of  the  existing  market 
uncertainties.  At  the  same  time,  innovation  in  battery  technologies  and  the  harmonization  of 
international standards would level the playing field and contribute to lowering current high costs 
of the technology. (McKinsey 2023a) 

4.3  What economic transformation is necessary to ensure environmental and social 

sustainability? 

Environmental and social issues can be addressed through economic transformation, which can 
be  summarized  in  three  aspects:  demand  reduction,  circularity  and  decarbonization  of  energy 
inputs (WEF 2020b), with the corresponding adhesion to standards and legislation that serve to 
prove efforts to avoid and mitigate sustainability issues.  

Demand  reduction  refers  to  the  reduction  of  materials  inputs,  which  can  take  place  through 
technological advancement, optimization of fleet and battery use (e.g., extending the life of the 
battery) (WEF 2020c). Circularity would allow the minimization of issues related to disposal of 
batteries  and  would  contribute  to  minimizing  the  supply  needs  for  raw  materials.  And  finally, 
decarbonization of energy inputs refers to the energy use for production of materials and battery 
manufacture, and the electricity mix of the grid used to charge the vehicles.  

Following  these  three  strategies,  the  optimization  of  material  and  energy  resources  and 
economies of scale, which add to economic sustainability of the e-truck market, would support 
environmental and social sustainability.  

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Glossary 

Battery  Degradation:  Battery  degradation  refers  to  a  phenomenon  in  which  the  health  of 
batteries is adversely affected by its operating and storage conditions, with deterioration occurring 
during  charging/discharging  and  during  storage.  It  leads  to  loss  in  the  battey’s  original  energy 
capacity. 

Battery  Passport:  A  Battery  Passport  functions  as  a  digital  record  for  individual  batteries, 
documenting  their  entire  lifecycle,  from  the  initial  sourcing  of  raw  materials  throughout 
refurbishment  and  recycling. 
the  battery's  composition, 
manufacturing, performance, and environmental impact. 

information  about 

It  contains 

Carbon Capture and Storage: CCUS involves the capture of CO2, generally from large point 
sources like power generation or industrial facilities that use either fossil fuels or biomass as fuel. 
If not being used on-site, the captured CO2 is compressed and transported by pipeline, ship, rail 
or truck to be used in a range of applications or injected into deep geological formations such as 
depleted oil and gas reservoirs or saline aquifers. 

Circularity: Circularity in electric vehicle industry is a practice in which the main components are 
intentionally  designed  to  be  upgraded,  reused,  repurposed,  refurbished,  remanufactured  or 
recycled to have precious/recoverable materials easily extracted from them post its end of life. 

Cradle-to-grave: Cradle-to-grave assessment considers impacts at each stage of a product's life 
cycle, from the time natural resources are extracted from the ground and processed through each 
subsequent stage of manufacturing, transportation, product use, and ultimately, disposal. 

End of Life: End of Life of e-truck batteries is the end of battery’s life in the automotive sector 
beyond  which  the  battery  has  lost  a  significant  proportion  of  its  original  energy  capacity  and 
therefore doesn’t perform efficiently comparatively. 

Marginal  Emissions:  The  term  marginal  emissions  refer  to  the  amount  of  additional  GHG 
emissions  or  other  pollutants  produced  as  a  result  of  a  specific  change  in  energy  or  resource 
consumption.  The marginal emissions factor refers to rate at which emissions would change with 
a small change to electricity load. 

Retired/Spent  e-truck  Batteries:  This  refers  to  batteries  that  are  no  longer  useful  in  e-truck 
application and can enter reuse/recycling phase. 

Second Life of Batteries: The second life of e-truck batteries refer to batteries that have reached 
its  end  of  first  life  in  e-truck  application,  but  still  have  enough  capacity  to  be  be  reused, 
repurposed,  refurbished,  remanufactured  to  be  used  for  second  life  application  including 
stationary application. 

State of Health: State of health refers to the health of e-truck batteries which is represented in 
percentage of remaining capacity of the battery. 

Upstream and Downstream: Upstream operations refer to identifying, extracting and producing 
materials  for  e-trucks  batteries  and  components  whereas  downstream  operations  include  the 
production and manufacturing of these components and e-trucks bringing products to consumers. 

                                                                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Bibliography 

Billy, R. G., & Müller, D. B. (2023). Aluminium use in passenger cars poses systemic challenges 
for  recycling  and  GHG  emissions.  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  190,  106827. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2022.106827   

Börner, Martin F., Moritz H. Frieges, Benedikt Späth, Kathrin Spütz, Heiner H. Heimes, Dirk Uwe 
Sauer, and Weihan Li. (2022). “Challenges of Second-Life Concepts for Retired Electric Vehicle 
101095. 
Batteries.” 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2022.101095  

Physical 

Science 

Reports 

(10): 

Cell 

3 

CGEP,  Columbia  |.  (2021).  “Low-Carbon  Production  of  Iron  &  Steel:  Technology  Options, 
Economic Assessment, and Policy.” Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University SIPA 
|  CGEP.  March  8,  2021.  https://www.energypolicy.columbia.edu/publications/low-carbon-
production-iron-steel-technology-options-economic-assessment-and-policy/.   

CRS (2020). Environmental Effects of Battery Electric and Internal Combustion Engine Vehicles. 
https://sgp.fas.org/crs/misc/R46420.pdf  

Del Pero, Francesco, Massimo Delogu, and Marco Pierini. (2018). “Life Cycle Assessment in the 
Automotive Sector: A Comparative Case Study of Internal Combustion Enginge (ICE) and Electric 
Car.”   

EEA. 2018. “Electric Vehicles from Life Cycle and Circular Economy Perspectives.”   

EERE.  2023.  “Environmental  Impacts  and  Siting  of  Wind  Projects.”  Energy.Gov.  2023. 
https://www.energy.gov/eere/wind/environmental-impacts-and-siting-wind-projects.   

European Commission. (2019). Electric and hybrid cars: New rules on noise emitting to protect 
https://single-market-
vulnerable 
economy.ec.europa.eu/news/electric-and-hybrid-cars-new-rules-noise-emitting-protect-
vulnerable-road-users-2019-07-03_en  

Commission. 

European 

users 

road 

- 

European  Commission.  (2023a).  “European  Critical  Raw  Materials  Act.”  Text.  European 
Commission 
2023. 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_1661.   

Commission. 

European 

- 

———. (2023b). Regulation (EU) 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 
July  2023  concerning  batteries  and  waste  batteries,  amending  Directive  2008/98/EC  and 
Regulation  (EU)  2019/1020  and  repealing  Directive  2006/66/EC  (Text  with  EEA  relevance) 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2023/1542/oj  

GBA  and  WEF.  2019.  “A  Vision 
https://www.globalbattery.org/media/publications/WEF_A_Vision_for_a_Sustainable_Battery_V
alue_Chain_in_2030_Report.pdf.    

for  a  Sustainable  Battery  Value  Chain 

in  2030.” 

Goldman  Sachs.  (2022)  Green  Metals  Battery  Metals  Watch  the  end  of  the  beginning 
https://www.goldmansachs.com/intelligence/pages/gs-research/battery-metals-watch-the-end-
of-the-beginning/report.pdf    

                                                                                                                                   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Hawkins,  Troy,  Guillaume  Majeau-Bettez,  Bhawna  Singh,  and  Anders  Stroemman.  2013. 
“Comparative Environmental Life Cycle Assessment of Conventional and Electric Vehicles.”   
ICCT.  2018.  “Effects  of  Battery  Manufacturing  on  Electric  Vehicle  Life-Cycle  Greenhouse  Gas 
Emissions.”   

ICCT. 2022. “Road freight decarbonization in Europe: Readiness of the European fleets for zero-
emission  trucking.”  https://theicct.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/road-freight-decarbonization-
europe-sep22.pdf   

ICCT.  2023.  “A  COMPARISON  OF  THE  LIFE-CYCLE  GREENHOUSE  GAS  EMISSIONS  OF 
EUROPEAN  HEAVY-DUTY  VEHICLES  AND  FUELS.”  https://theicct.org/publication/lca-ghg-
emissions-hdv-fuels-europe-feb23/   

ISO. 2023. “ISO 14083 Greenhouse Gases - Quantification and Reporting of Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions Arising from Transport Chain Operations.” 2023.   

ITF 
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/transp_outlook-en-2019-en.  

(2019), ITF 

Transport 

Outlook 

2019, 

OECD 

Publishing, 

Iyer, R. K., Kelly, J. C., & Elgowainy, A. (2023). Vehicle-cycle and life-cycle analysis of medium-
duty and heavy-duty trucks in the United States. Science of The Total Environment, 891, 164093. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.164093   

McKinsey.  2023a. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/battery-2030-
resilient-sustainable-and-circular.   

“Battery  2030:  Resilient,  Sustainable,  and  Circular.”  2023. 

———.  2023b.  The  race  to  decarbonize  electric-vehicle  batteries,  McKinsey  &  Company. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/the-race-to-
decarbonize-electric-vehicle-batteries   

Mowbray, S. (2023) Internal Combustion vs. evs: Learning from the past to boost sustainability, 
Mongabay  Environmental  News.  Available  at:  https://news.mongabay.com/2023/08/internal-
combustion-vs-evs-learning-from-the-past-to-boost-sustainability/   

OECD. 2016. OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from 
OECD. 
High-Risk 
Conflict-Affected 
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264252479-en.   

Edition. 

Areas: 

Third 

and 

O’Rourke,  D.,  &  Connolly,  S.  (2003).  Just  Oil?  The  Distribution  of  Environmental  and  Social 
Impacts  of  Oil  Production  and  Consumption.  Annual  Review  of  Environment  and  Resources, 
28(1), 587–617. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.energy.28.050302.105617  

Responsible  Minerals  Initiative.  2021.  “RESPONSIBLE  MINERALS  ASSURANCE  PROCESS 
https://www.responsiblemineralsinitiative.org/minerals-due-
and 
diligence/standards/   

STANDARDS.” 

Ricardo. 2021. “Lifecycle Analysis of UK Road Vehicles.” Final Report, no. 4.   

Scania.  2020  Life  cycle  assessment  of  distribution  vehicles  ‘battery  electric  vs  diesel 
driven’. https://www.scania.com/content/dam/group/press-and-media/press-
releases/documents/Scania-Life-cycle-assessment-of-distribution-vehicles.pdf.   

                                                                                                                                   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Exploring Sustainability in Road Freight 
Electrification: A comprehensive FAQ 

Smart Freight Centre. 2024. “Measuring and Reporting the Carbon Footprint of Electric Freight 
Vehicle Operations.”  

Transport & Environment. 2021. “From Dirty Oil to Clean Batteries. Batteries vs. Oil: A Systematic 
Comparison of Material Requirements.”   

Transport & Environment. (2023). Impact assessment of the transition to zero-emission trucks in 
Europe.  Transport  &  Environment.  https://www.transportenvironment.org/discover/impact-
assessment-of-the-transition-to-zero-emission-trucks-in-europe/   

UNDP Serbia. 2010. “Guidelines on the Environmental Impact Assessment for Wind Farms.”   

UNECE.  2022. 
https://unece.org/sed/documents/2021/10/reports/life-cycle-assessment-electricity-generation-
options.   

“Life  Cycle  Assessment  of  Electricity  Generation  Options.”  2022. 

Verma,  Shrey,  Puneet  Verma,  and  Gaurav  Dwivedi.  2021.  “Life  Cycle  Assessment  of  Electric 
Vehicles in Comparison to Combustion Engine Vehicles: A Review.”   

WEF.  2020a.  “Aluminum  for  Climate:  Exploring  Pathways  to  Decarbonize  the  Aluminium 
Industry.”   

———. 2020b. “Forging Ahead: A Materials Roadmap for the Zero-Carbon Car.”   

———. 2020c. “The Road Ahead: A Policy Research Agenda for Automotive Circularity.”   
WRI and WBCSD. (2011) Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard, 
World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD). https://www.wbcsd.org/girhj    

WEF and McKinsey. (2021). Road Freight Zero: Pathways to faster adoption of zero-emission 
trucks.https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/automotive%20and%20assembl
y/our%20insights/road%20freight%20global%20pathways%20report/pathways-to-faster-
adoption-of-zero-emission-trucks-2021.pdf   

WRI, and WBCSD. 2013. “Greenhouse Gas Protocol - Technical Guidance for Calculating Scope 
3 Emissions.”   

Zimmermann, Antonia. 2023. “Europe’s Green Dilemma: Mining Key Minerals without Destroying 
Nature.”  POLITICO  (blog).  March  15,  2023.  https://www.politico.eu/article/europes-green-
dilemma-mining-key-minerals-without-destroying-nature/   

                                                                                                                                   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
Join our journey towards 
efficient and zero-emission 
global freight and logistics 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

www.smartfreightcentre.org 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

info@smartfreightcentre.org  

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
