Ro-Ro GHG Emissions
Accounting Guidance

VERSION 2, NOVEMBER 2023

© Association of European Vehicle Logistics and Smart Freight Centre 2023 

Suggested citation: Association of European Vehicle Logistics and Smart Freight Centre. Guidance document 
for a GHG accounting and reporting methodology for the Ro-Ro sector 2023 

This  publication  may  be  reproduced  in  whole  or  in  part  in  any  form  for  educational  or  non-profit  purposes 
without special permission from the copyright holder, provided acknowledgment of the source is made. Smart 
Freight Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of any publication that uses Guidance document for a GHG 
accounting and reporting methodology for the Ro-Ro sector as a source. No use of this publication may be made 
for  resale  or  for  any  other  commercial  purpose  whatsoever,  without  prior  permission  in  writing  from  Smart 
Freight Centre.  

Disclaimer 
The views expressed in this publication are those of the Association of European Vehicle Logistics, Smart Freight 
Centre and staff, consultants and management, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Trustees 
of ECG or SFC. ECG and SFC does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and does 
not accept responsibility for consequence of their use. 

Acknowledgements 
This report was written by Marcus Lomax, Rickard Lindström and Ludovic Laffineur of Smart Freight Centre. 

About ECG 
ECG is the established European platform for the outbound automotive logistics sector bringing together logistics 
service  providers,  manufacturer  logistics  managers  and  suppliers  to  the  sector.  ECG  aims  to  facilitate  non-
commercial  collaboration  between  member  companies  and  assist  them  in  sharing  best  practices  in  many 
operational areas, especially the harmonisation of operational standards. 

Contact 
ECG – The Association of European Vehicle Logistics  
+32 2 706 82 80  
info@ecgassociation.eu   
www.ecgassociation.eu  

About Smart Freight Centre 
Smart Freight Centre (SFC) is a global non-profit organization dedicated to an efficient and zero emission freight 
sector. We cover all freight and only freight. SFC works with the Global Logistics Emissions Council (GLEC) and 
other stakeholders to drive transparency and industry action – contributing to Paris Climate Agreement targets 
and Sustainable Development Goals.  

Our role is to guide companies on their journey to zero  emission logistics, advocate for supportive policy and 
programs,  and  raise  awareness.  Our  goal  is  that  100+  multinationals  reduce  at  least  30%  of  their  logistics 
emissions by 2030 compared to 2015 and reach net-zero emissions by 2050. 

Contact 
Smart Freight Centre 
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org 

Version 2 – November 2023 

2 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Table of Contents 

PART OF A MULTIMODAL PROJECT............................................................................................ 4 

ISO14083 and GLEC Framework................................................................................................. 4 

Challenges with regards to the ship types under consideration .................................................. 4 

How this guidance has been developed ..................................................................................... 5 

Regulations influencing the methods development ................................................................... 6 

Intensity Measures ................................................................................................................... 6 
Project outcome ............................................................................................................................................. 7 
Intensity principles and calculation GHG intensity values ............................................................................. 8 

Transport Operation Categories ................................................................................................ 9 

Reporting period and vessel inclusion ..................................................................................... 10 

Distance measure ................................................................................................................... 11 
Distance to apply in GHG intensity calculations ........................................................................................... 11 
Distance to apply in scope 3 ‘footprinting’ calculations ............................................................................... 11 

Fuel emission factors (carbon conversion factors) .................................................................... 11 

Intensity and scope 3 calculation examples ............................................................................. 15 
Intensity calculations .................................................................................................................................... 15 
Scope 3 calculations ..................................................................................................................................... 17 

Suggested developments and revisions ................................................................................... 17 

Version 2 – November 2023 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART OF A MULTIMODAL PROJECT 

Smart Freight Centre (SFC) has conducted this methods development for the Ro-Ro segment as part of 
a parallel VDA (German Association of the Automotive Industry) and ECG (the Association of European 
Vehicles Logistics) project on multimodal GHG accounting guidance for the automotive industry. The 
multimodal  guideline  establishes  roles,  responsibilities  and  sets  the  standard  for  the  reporting  of 
shipment  emissions,  transport  activity  and  emission  intensities  from  the  transport  operators  to  the 
cargo owners for all transport modes including Ro-Ro. The main objective of this guidance was to create 
a harmonized methodology for the calculation and reporting of logistics GHG emissions for the Ro-Ro 
industry,  in  accordance  with  and  in  alignment  to  the  existing  industry  and  international  standards 
regarding carbon accounting for the Logistics industry, namely the GLEC Framework1 and ISO 140832. 
This will lead to a unified and transparent GHG accounting and reporting methodology within the Ro-
Ro sector, expected to trigger an increase in reporting and to lay a foundation for a more structured 
collaboration  on  GHG  emission  reduction  initiatives  in  this  sector.  This  includes  the  calculation  and 
reporting of Life Cycle emissions in the form of Well-to-Wake (WTW) and CO2 equivalents which can be 
further split into Well-to-Tank and Tank-to-Wake emissions.  

ISO14083 and GLEC Framework 

International standards give consumers and investors more confidence in the products,  services and 
information that they solicit from companies. Regulators and governments count on standards to help 
develop better and more consistent policy measures and regulations. Companies themselves save time 
when they can rely on standards, because they don’t have to reinvent the wheel. 

The GLEC Framework has rapidly become the common industry standard for calculating and reporting 
emissions from freight transportation and logistics. However, a formal ISO standard ensures a single 
approach  that  can  be  widely  accepted  by  industry,  governments  and  investors.  SFC,  together  with 
partners,  have  developed  a  new ISO  Standard  ‘ISO14083’ that  covers  both  passenger  and  freight 
transport,  in  collaboration  with  the  German  Institute  for  Standardization (DIN) which  hosts  the 
International Secretariat. The intention is that the principles and methodology for freight transport will 
be based on, and consistent with, the GLEC Framework. This will emphasize its position as the industry 
reference  for  logistics  emission  accounting  and  reporting  across  the  multimodal  supply  chain. ISO 
14083 will replace the existing European standard EN 162583. 

Challenges with regards to the ship types under consideration 

There  have  been  challenges  in  calculating  the  emission-intensity  for  certain  ship  categories,  most 
notably for Ro-Ro cargo vessels and Ro-Ro passenger ships. The problems are mainly due to the fact 
that  the  aforementioned  ship  types  are  typically  designed  for  specific  routes  (usually  with  main 
dimension  limitations)  and  /  or  to  specific  transport  tasks  with  tight  timetables  (for  Ro-Ro  vessels). 
Altogether, there is a very high scatter in the ship design speed and actual operation speeds, leading to 
a wide variation in propulsion power requirements and machinery configurations. Both the UN body 
governing shipping, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the EU have been struggling in 

1  Smart Freight Centre. Global Logistics Emissions Council Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and 
Reporting. (2019). ISBN 978-90-82-68790-3. 
2 ISO 14083:2023 - Greenhouse gases — Quantification and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions arising from 
transport chain operations 
3 EN 16258 - European Standards (en-standard.eu) 

Version 2 – November 2023 

4 

 
 
 
 
finding ways to report the carbon intensity of those segments of the maritime sector in a ‘sufficiently‘ 
accurate way.  

How this guidance has been developed 

The  development  of  this  guidance  originated  as  a  request  from  OEMS,  the  cargo  owners,  for  a 
harmonized calculation and reporting methodology for Ro-Ro cargo. Ro-Ro was one of the few transport 
modes up until now that did not have carrier/transport operator specific emission intensity values. This 
guidance will allow cargo owners  to move beyond  general scope 3 reporting using industry average 
default values to carrier specific values for more detailed scope 3 reporting.  

In  order  to  come  to  a  consensus,  a  structured  dialogue  took  place  to  carefully  carve  out  a  GHG 
accounting  and  reporting  framework  to  gain  sufficient  acceptance  among  the  sector’s  various 
stakeholders. This was done through a series of meetings with ECG members over the course of Q1 and 
Q2 2023. In parallel, several bilateral meetings with ECG members took place and written input  was 
requested through emails and questionnaires in order to make sure nothing was overlooked. Overall, 
the  discussions  evolved  to  focus  on  the  capturing  of  transport  activity  and  fuel  consumption  in  an 
accurate, consistent and ‘fair’ manner.  

A number of key categories, concepts and parameters were identified and aligned to ensure a common 
guideline  that  fully  reflects  the  diverse  range  of  the  Ro-Ro  sector  and  the  requirements  of  the 
aforementioned  standards.    As  an  initial  phase  several  rounds  of  discussions  took  place  with  ECG 
members. The list of key topics that were covered: 

•  A calculation methodology for Ro-Ro sea transport which takes into account the different types of 
existing  Ro-Ro  sea  transport  for  specialized  and  mixed-use  vessels,  based  on  existing  industry 
practice to supplement the approach set out in ISO 14083 where additional specificity is required 
to reflect Ro-Ro operations;  

•  A set of TOCs (Transport Operating Categories) specific to Ro-Ro sea transport, reflecting sub-sector 

specific terminology and the specialized and mixed-use vessel types of Ro-Ro sea transport; 

•  The desire to offer a methodology that does not rely solely on cargo mass as the unit for ‘quantity 

of freight’ in the calculation of transport activity; 

•  The calculation of GHG emissions and emission intensities using primary data including all legs and 

fuel consumption during the identified reporting period;  

•  Default  emission  intensity  values  for  use  in  situations  where  scope  3  calculations  by  Ro-Ro 
customers  are  being  done without  access  to  primary data.  Such  default  emission  intensities  are 
provided by SFC for typical operations, via its GLEC Framework; 

The transport operators and participants of the working group have the data at hand which enables the 
reporting  of emissions,  transport  activity  and emission  intensity  based  on  primary  fuel  consumption 
data. The dialogue led to agreeing on a  primary and complementary transport activity measure, the 
definition  of  Transport  Operation  Categories  (TOCs)  and  distance  to  be  used  when  calculating  the 
intensity measure. 

Version 2 – November 2023 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulations influencing the methods development 

Regulations are clearly an incentive for carriers to improve data monitoring and reporting and have been 
a driver for the reporting of KPIs. In general, shipping emissions accounting under the GLEC Framework 
follows the principles developed by the maritime sector. The GLEC Framework is in alignment with the 
principles of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) Energy Efficiency Operation Index (EEOI) 
guidelines. The IMO provides guidelines to calculate the EEOI but there is no requirement to report this 
metric. The EU MRV regulation has gone a step further requiring the reporting of EEOI data which is 
publicly available (non-anonymized) on an individual ship basis. On many occasions during the meetings’ 
discussions reference was made to the EU MRV regulation.   

Intensity Measures 

Good quality primary data is what should be used by a transport or logistics operator to calculate scope 
1 GHG emissions, and what cargo owners commonly aim to collect from transport operators (carriers) 
for  their  Scope  3  emissions  accounting.  Scope  3  emissions  are  generally  based  on  carrier  transport 
activity data in Tonne Kilometers, coupled with primary fuel consumption data. Primary data can range 
from highly precise information to aggregated values. Primary fuel consumption data is to be measured 
by the transport operator’s actual fuel consumption over the identified reporting period. 

The ambition of the Ro-Ro working group is to use the highest quality emission data from transport 
operators and for this to be made available to actors along the same physical supply chain. All emission 
calculations,  including  scope  3,  should  be  done using primary  fuel  consumption  to  match  the  cargo 
owner’s solicited cargo transport and the transport operator’s emission performance over the reporting 
period. In the case that emission data sharing between transport operator and cargo owner cannot be 
actioned for any number of reasons, the cargo owner starting on their journey to calculate and report 
their  emissions  can  use  transport  activity  data  coupled  with  a  default  emission  intensity  value 
representative of average industry operating practices.  As a starting point,  default data with varying 
levels of precision can provide a general indication of emissions. The source of any default data used 
ought to be clearly specified by the reporting entity (typically a cargo owner). A year after having started 
to report their Scope 3 emissions, a Cargo owner should not rely on default emission values for scope 3 
reporting but request carrier specific emission intensity values for their solicited cargo transport. The 
commitment remains to report carrier specific emission values based on primary data for the transport 
service solicited.  

It is important to remember that primary data is more representative of actual freight operations than 
default data. Using default data may lead to results that over- or underestimate emissions compared 
with actual freight operations. As efforts to improve visibility of the transport chain continue to expand, 
a company will be able to transition from using default emission intensity data to using and reporting 
more detailed values based on primary data. Another option is to apply modelled emission intensity 
values, also in this case primary data generally brings higher accuracy to the result. 

Version 2 – November 2023 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Outcome  

It was determined that tonne-km should be the primary measure of transport activity for sea and across 
all transport modes. However, there was a clear desire to develop and agree on a complementary GHG 
intensity measure. Further, it was clear that such a measure, more or less, ought to reflect cargo volume 
and/or areas, as a complement to the purely mass based measure of tonne-km . Main rational is that 
Ro-Ro vessels often are limited by volume or area capacity rather than cargo mass. A complementary 
measure  is  supposed  to  be  an  additional  KPI  that  widens  the  understanding  of  a  vessel  Transport 
Operating Category’s (TOC’s) GHG intensity performance. SFC perceived the elaborative discussions as 
a desire for introducing a fairer benchmark into a shipping segment (Ro-Ro) that serves many different 
transport needs. 

Especially for Ro-Pax ships, the chosen method of allocation of emissions will have large impact on the 
resulting emission intensity value for both freight and passenger transport. Since the choice was to avoid 
disproportional  allocation  of  emission  to  either  passengers  or  cargo,  it  was  decided  to  choose  the 
method that offers the fairest allocation of emissions.  

ISO 14083 permits the use of a transport activity measure that is also directly relevant to the sector in 
question. Based on ISO 14083, the measure of ‘quantity of freight’ or alternative to mass which serves 
the  Ro-Ro  industry  is  a  value  that  is  a  combination  of  mass  and  volume.  This  alternative  to  mass  is 
referenced in ISO 14083 as Standard Passenger-equivalent presented below (right hand side). In order 
to  avoid  confusion  this  unit,  was  renamed  to  cargo  equivalent  units  (CEU)  for  the  Ro-Ro  methods 
standard.  

From  the  perspective  of  the  Ro-Ro  passenger  operator,  the  mass  used  in  the  calculation  of  GHG 
emissions represents:  

- 

for freight: the total mass of the vehicle including each consignment.   

Version 2 – November 2023 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
- 

- 

for passengers travelling in a vehicle: the mass of the vehicle plus the mass of the passengers and 
any accompanying luggage;  
for foot passengers: the mass of the passengers and their luggage.  

NOTE: The number of passenger equivalents of a passenger vehicle shown in the table excludes the 
passengers transported meaning that the total number of passenger equivalents for a car carrying 3 
passengers is 4,3 - i.e. 1,3 for the car itself plus 3 for the passengers. 

The CEU is intended to satisfy the need for a complementary value that does not rely exclusively on 
mass but also takes into account length, width and height which reflects the space that cargo occupies 
on a Ro-Ro vessel. The ISO CEU list above can be applied. A revision and update list will be expanded on 
by a number of pilot OEMs and developed and published by ECG/VDA to reflect additional vehicles and 
other  Ro-Ro  cargo  types.  Such  process  ought  to  be  conducted  at  a  multimodal  level  since 
cargo/passenger  equivalent  units  is  a  measure  for  multimodal  application  just  as  tonne-km.  An 
alternative  to  the  expansion  of  the  CEU  list  is  to  apply  the  formula  itself  directly,  this  provides  an 
unlimited granularity and does not rely on a future revision for its application for other cargo types. The 
CEU formula is as follows:  

CEU = (0,00041 x mass (kg)) + (0,019756  x volume (m3)) 

(Volume = cargo width x cargo height x cargo length (measured at the widest, highest and longest points 
of the cargo (cubical principle)) 

Intensity principles and calculation GHG intensity values 

The principle appointed by this standard for calculating GHG intensities is the same logic as behind the 
Energy Efficiency Operational Indicator (EEOI). This means a leg-by-leg principle is applied, e.g.:  

LEG 1: 1.000 Km x 20.000 tonnes = 20.000.000  
+ 
LEG 2: 4.000 Km x 30.000 tonnes = 120.000.000 

= 140.000.000 TonneKm 

All (see exception below) fuel consumption should be included in the production of the intensity 
value (total fuel consumption / total transport activity), while only cargo should go into the transport 
activity value, not ballast.  

There is no issue with a simplified EEOI approach, as long as such simplification delivers the same 
result (same ‘correctness’) on the transport activity part of the calculation. E.g., a Ro-Pax service on a 
regular schedule might conduct the transport activity calculation using the average leg distance times 
total cargo transported.  

Fuel consumption exceptions: if a vessel is “out of service”, meaning not in a commercial operation 
(e.g. due to maintenance), this part of the consumption should be excluded. This applies also for any 
possible (for some reason) transport activity being conducted during the same period. 

Containers  are  included  on  “equal  terms”  as  rolling  cargo,  meaning  a  loaded  container  should  be 
included  in  transport  activity  calculation,  and,  in  such  loaded  condition  include  the  weight  of  the 

Version 2 – November 2023 

8 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
container  (‘empty  weight’)  itself.  However,  an  empty  container  should  be  fully  excluded  from  the 
transport  activity  calculation,  meaning  neither  account  for  the  empty  weight  of  the  container.  This 
principle  is  applicable  for  both  the  TonneKm  and  CEUkm  transport  activity  calculations.  In  the  CEU 
calculation case, the volume part of the CEU formula is applied just as for rolling cargo (see section CEU 
calculation above). Equal terms above refer to loaded containers being included in the transport activity 
parameter, but also to the fact that ‘empty weight’ (if loaded) is included. Just as a trailer and truck are 
included and considered ‘cargo’, not only the vehicles loaded onto the trailer. 

Please note that for the transport operator, the trailer, the truck and the actual cargo is considered for 
quantifying  ‘quantity  of  freight’  when  determining  transport  activity.  From  the  cargo  owner’s 
perspective however, only the actual cargo is considered as ‘quantity of freight’ in determining  their 
respective transport activity. This means that the emissions allocated to the cargo are the same for the 
transport operator and the cargo owner but the ‘quantity of freight’ it is allocated to differs. As a result, 
the cargo owner must be aware that the emission intensity value provided by the transport operator 
represents the ‘gross quantity of freight’. It is therefore of paramount importance that  the transport 
operator  provides  the  cargo  owner  with  the  Well-to-Wake  emissions,  the  emission  intensity,  the 
transport  activity,  the  gross  ‘quantity  of  freight’  and  the  distance  associated  with  the  cargo  owners 
solicited transport service. 

With the associated distance and emissions being the same and only the ‘quantity of freight’ differing 
between the Transport Operator and the cargo owner, the transport-activity and emission intensity can 
be recalculated for the cargo owner’s scope 3 emission reporting using ‘net cargo’ as the quantity of 
freight in the measure of transport activity. 

Transport Operation Categories 

The  development  of  Transport  Operation  Categories  (TOCs)  specific  to  the  Ro-Ro  industry  is  key  to 
enable cargo owners to select the most accurate emission intensity for the transports and apply in their 
scope 3 footprinting, as opposed to applying a value ‘diluted’ by different vessel types not relevant for 
the cargo owner concerned. Defining the ship types under consideration according to their size, volume, 
trade pattern cargo type specifics etc. is not a straightforward task. Post elaborative group and bilateral 
discussions the TOCs selected were inspired by the EU MRV and IMO ship type classification to align 
with existing standards but also to reflect the operations of the methods development working group, 
the categories selected are: Vehicle Carrier (PCC+PTCC), Con-Ro, Ro-Ro (‘Ro-Ro cargo’/’high and heavy’) 
and Ro-Pax. These TOCs will serve as the level of aggregation of carrier performance data in addition to 
a Global fleet average. Meaning, that all vessels within a fleet are grouped based on vessel type, each 
individual vessel’s operational data is then added to a TOC average (transport activity weighted average) 
calculation. E.g., (vessel 1 fuel consumption + vessel 2 fuel consumption) / (vessel 1 transport activity + 
vessel 2 transport activity) = TOC average intensity value. 

Appointing TOC  and  fleet-wide  averages  as  the  data  aggregations  is  a  key  component  of  this Ro-Ro 
methodology guidance. However, there are cases where individual vessel  level intensity values make 
more sense, such as in time- and bareboat chartering situations. TOC and fleet-wide averages form the 
basis for the exchange of performance data between transport operator and cargo owner. Vessel level 
intensity outputs may be resorted to, but the concerned transport operator needs to clearly state which 
aggregation level is behind the value provided. 

Version 2 – November 2023 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See ‘Deep-sea versus short-sea' section below 

A TOC aggregation should make a distinction between short- and deep sea vessels. This is to increase 
accuracy and relevance of a TOC average intensity number when applied by a cargo owner in scope 3- 
or benchmarking situations.  This means that there are eight distinct categories for data aggregation. 
The main reason for this is to allow cargo owners to more easily identify the most accurate TOC GHG 
intensity value representing their operations. The reporting carrier is the one to determine which ships 
that falls under short-sea and which under deep-sea. 

TOC definitions: 

Vehicle carrier: a multi-deck roll-on-roll-off cargo ship designed for the carriage of empty cars and truck 
Ro-pax ship: a ship, which carries more than 12 passengers and which has roll-on/roll-off cargo space on board 

Ro-Ro cargo:  a ship designed for the carriage of roll-on-roll-off cargo transportation units or with roll-on-roll-off cargo 
spaces. 
Container/ro-ro cargo ship (Con-Ro): a hybrid of a container ship and a Ro-Ro cargo ship in independent sections; 

Reporting period and vessel inclusion 

In practice, for high frequency, regular, repeatable, or short duration transport, it is common for the 
operator to aggregate a year’s worth of operational data for transport operations that occur during that 
time period. This has the benefit of removing seasonal fluctuations from the reported results that can 
obscure more significant long-term trends. 

It was agreed that the reporting period will start on a calendar year basis, meaning the data collected 
for the reporting will represent the past calendar year’s operational data. This is similar to the reporting 
period used in the The Sea Cargo Charter (SCC)4 and the Clean Cargo Working Group5. This will move to 
a quarterly update to the carrier performance data from 2025 onwards to align with the multimodal 
project’s  ambition  and  decision  for  more  regular  updates  to  the  emission  values  used  for  scope  3 
reporting. 

Owned, managed and operated vessels should be included in the reporting. This means, a cargo 
owner applying a GHG intensity value in its scope 3 calculations might (depending on ambition on 
granularity) need to be informed whether any potential transshipments have been part of the cargo 
movements or not.  

4 Sea Cargo Charter is a maritime organisation set up to help signatories understand their operating carbon 
footprint and determine whether their overall emissions intensity aligns with IMO targets to reduce absolute 
emissions from global activity by 50% compared to 2008 levels 
5 Clean Cargo | Smart Freight Centre 

Version 2 – November 2023 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Distance measure 

Distance to apply in GHG intensity calculations 

The distance by which a shipment is transported is measured from the point where the shipper hands 
it over to the carrier and ends with the hand-over of the shipment to another carrier or the end receiver. 
While this may seem simple, especially in light of developments in GPS and telematics systems, finding 
distance  is  part  of  what  makes  logistics  GHG  accounting  a  complicated  endeavor.  Many  shipments 
involve multiple transport legs and modes; some are handled by multiple carriers. Sometimes there are 
intermediate stopovers in locations that reflect a carrier’s transport network rather than the most direct 
route.  Sometimes  routes  are  modified  due  to  weather,  tides,  construction  or  traffic  conditions, 
information  that  may  or  may  not  be  known  to  other  parties.  This  is  complicated  further  by  goods 
traveling on shared transport assets, where shipments are consolidated to increase vehicle loading and 
hence efficiency, but may lead to longer distances being travelled than would be the most direct route 
for  an  individual  shipment.  Distance  information  should  be  collected  for  each  transport  leg,  either 
through direct measurement or estimation and represent the overall route as far as possible. 

Distance to apply in scope 3 ‘footprinting’ calculations 

Distance information should be collected directly or indirectly (e.g., via a Logistics Service Provider) from 
the  carrier(s)  concerned  and  represent  the  overall  route  as  far  as  possible.  It  is  of  fundamental 
importance (provided high accuracy is aspired) that the distance measure applied in scope 3 application 
is the same as applied the GHG intensity calculation. To bring about a reasonably accurate end-result, 
there ought to be an information link between the carrier and cargo owner to ensure the actual route 
between port of origin and port of destination is reflected in the distance number.  

A  carrier  who  applies  the  ‘Shortest  Feasible  Distance’  (SFD)  (appointed  as  default  procedure  by 
ISO14083) will still need to ensure the overall route (e.g. port A-C-D-E) is reflected since SFD refers to 
the ‘shortest feasible distance’ between a port of origin and port of destination including intermediary 
port stopovers/port calls. 

Maritime transport operators currently report transport-activity and emission intensities using actual 
distances rather than SFD. It is therefore imperative that the distance measure applied by cargo owners 
for scope 3 reporting matches the distance used by the transport operator to ensure that the distance 
used  for  calculating  transport  activity  and  for  calculating  GHG  emissions  match.  As  a  result,  it  is 
important  that  transport  operators  share  the  Well-to-Wake  emissions,  the  emission  intensity,  the 
transport-activity, but also the actual distance travelled and ‘quantity of freight’ separately so that the 
cargo  owner’s  transport-activity  and  emission  intensity  can  be  recalculated  using  the  ‘quantity  of 
freight’ of the actual cargo (net cargo) and the actual distance. 

Fuel emission factors (carbon conversion factors)  

Fuel emission factors play an important role in the calculation of transport emissions. They are used to 
convert the fuel and energy used to power freight transportation into greenhouse gas emission values. 
Emission factors are a key part of any carbon footprinting exercise. The emission factor associated with 
fuel purchased on any particular day at a particular location has a natural variability associated with it, 
depending upon factors such as the nature of the original feedstock, the locations of production and 
consumption  and  the  distribution  mechanisms  used,  the  energy  inputs  to  and  the  nature  of  the 

Version 2 – November 2023 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
production processes used, etc. In general, conventional (fossil) fuels tend to be blends that originate 
from  a mix  of  sources  and  processes  developed  to ensure  that  they fit  within  the  tolerances  of  the 
prevailing local fuel quality standards.  

As a result, it is not standard practice to try to put an exact figure on every batch of fuel. Instead, it is 
accepted practice to use representative values with the understanding that emissions will, over time, 
average  out  and  match  the  representative  value  (assuming  that  it  is  well  calculated).  The  potential 
feedstocks and production processes for conventional fuels are relatively well known and as a result 
there  tends  to  be  a  relatively  low variation  in  values quoted  for  these fuels. In contrast  ‘new fuels’, 
including some renewable fuels and fuels quoted as having low GHG emissions, tend to have  greater 
variability in potential production process and feedstock combinations, with resulting greater variability 
in the full life cycle emissions. 

Bearing this in mind it is vital that emission factors are based on the most credible sources. 

The  IMO  recently  decided  to  move  to  a  (well-to-wake)  WTW  reporting  basis  as  part  of  its  updated 
decarbonization strategy.  The current status of the process is set out in MEPC 80/7/4, the Final Report 
of the Correspondence Group on Marine Life Cycle Analysis.  Annex 1 to MEPC 80/7/4 contains draft 
guidelines on the calculation of life cycle GHG intensity of marine fuels, but initial proposals for default 
emission  factors  and  accepted  ranges  for  only  a  small  number  of  the  128  fuel  pathways  identified 
therein.  The IMO lifecycle assessment guidance (MEPC 80/7/4) is due to be finalized and published at 
MEPC81 (scheduled for Q2 2024). This document will provide a widely accepted framework for defining 
emission factors which will become the standard for the maritime industry; however, it is not clear how 
many fuels will be provided with emission factors when it is published.  Furthermore, it will not be a 
definitive answer to emission factor definition as further changes are expected in this evolving subject 
area and the IMO guidance is scheduled to be reviewed every 3 years to ensure it is kept up to date and 
in alignment with other related initiatives. 

In the absence of IMO published WTW emission factors, and as a short-term solution, we believe that 
it would be pragmatic to adopt a single set of emission factors for use irrespective of geography.  With 
this in mind, and keeping the logic that transparency will be key to ensure legitimacy and credibility for 
any pragmatic way forward, we propose the following cascading order of priority in coming up with a 
set of default emission factor values: 

1.  Emission factors for conventional liquid fuels in MEPC 80/7/4 should be used, where available; 
2.  All  other  emission  factors  should  be  taken  from  the  Fuel.EU  maritime/ecoinvent  lifecycle 
database  (v3.9.1)  and  work  by  IFEU  et  al.  that  is  related  to  the  implementation  of  the  EC’s 
renewable energy directive; 

3.  Any emission factors not available from 1 or 2 should be taken from the GREET database. 

The  majority  of  the  resulting  values  have  been  developed  in  the  context  of  updating  the  GLEC 
Framework  to  make  use  of  the  best  available  sources  in  line  with  the  approach  developed  for,  and 
described in, Annex J of ISO 14083. 

This approach has recently been adopted by the Poseidon Principles, Sea Cargo Charter and Clean Cargo. 

Whilst this approach is biased towards European values, it does provide simplicity in not having two lists 
based on geography. Therefore, we believe the values presented in the following table represent the 
best currently available set of emission factors. 

We propose that once IMO fixes on a full set of WTW values then these values will take precedence. It 
is likely, subject to us gaining a full and proper understanding of the approach used by IMO, that the 

Version 2 – November 2023 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
internal consistency that will come with such a development will be highly beneficial and is probably the 
best way forward in the medium term. 

Values are presented in the following table that show CO2e emissions for the WTW and TTW phases of 
the fuel cycle. Emission values are shown by mass of fuel and per unit of energy content. 

Version 2 – November 2023 

13 

 
 
FUEL EMISSION FACTORS – Primary List 

Fuel  

Heavy Fuel Oil (HSHFO) 

Heavy Fuel Oil (VLSFO) 

Light Fuel Oil (ULSFO) 

Liquefied Natural Gas (Otto dual fuel slow 
speed engine) 

Liquefied Natural Gas (Otto dual fuel slow 
speed engine) 

Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Butane) 

Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Propane) 

Methanol (Natural gas feedstock) 

WTW 
Emissions 

TTW 
Emissions 

WTW 
Emissions 

TTW 
Emissions 

Lower Heating 
value 

Source 

(kg CO2e / kg 
fuel) 

(kg CO2e / kg 
fuel) 

(g CO2e / MJ 
fuel) 

(g CO2e / MJ 
fuel) 

(MJ/kg) 

3.76 

3.84 

4.06 

4.05 

4.47 

4.05 

4.02 

1.50 

3.16 

3.16 

3.21 

3.24 

3.66 

3.00 

2.97 

1.11 

93.5 

95.5 

95.3 

82.5 

91.0 

88.0 

87.4 

75.0 

78.6 

78.6 

75.4 

66.0 

74.5 

65.2 

64.6 

55.5 

40.2 

40.2 

42.6 

MEPC 80/7/4 

MEPC 80/7/4 

Ecoinvent 3.9.1 cut-off 

49.1 

Fuel EU maritime amended 

49.1 

Fuel EU maritime amended 

46.0 

46.0 

20.0 

Ecoinvent 3.9.1 + fuel EU maritime 

Ecoinvent 3.9.1 + fuel EU maritime 

GREET (USA) 

Another subject for future revision will be where the emission reduction is (or will be) assigned to a specific cargo owner/shipper or LSP, and consumption of 
renewables not assigned (and will not be) to a specific cargo owner/shipper. Renewable fuels assigned to a specific cargo owner/shipper or LSP ought to, in a 
future split reporting system, be given a fuel emission factor representing a fossil fuel to avoid double counting of GHG reductions. For the time being, all renewable 
fuels consumed should be assigned a fuel emission factor representing a fossil fuel. If coherence with this Ro-Ro methods standard is aspired, the fuel category 
‘blends’ (see below) emission factor should be applied for all renewable fuels consumed. This to avoid double counting of GHG reductions.  

NOTE: The development of the set of fuel emission factors for renewables to apply is still underway. Until settled and introduced into this Ro-Ro guidance, all 
renewables ‘must’ be reported under the BLENDS category. 

Version 2 – November 2023 

14 

 
 
Intensity and scope 3 calculation examples 

Intensity calculations  

Ro-Ro, Con-Ro and Vehicle carriers 

Tonne-km  

Leg 1: 15.000 tonnes x 3.000 km = 45.000.000 

Leg 2: 30.000 tonnes x 2.000 km = 60.000.000 

Leg 3: 0 tonnes x 3.000 km = 0 

Total tonne-km: 105.000.000 

Fuel consumption 

Total consumption in tonnes Leg 1 + Leg 2 + Leg 3: VLSFO 1.250 + ULSFO 2.500 

Total CO2e in tonnes: (1.250 x 3,84) + (2.500 x 4,06) = 14.950 

Intensity 

Gram CO2e per tonne-km: (14.950 x 1.000.000) / 105.000.000 = 142,38 

CEUkm 

Leg 1: 5.000 CEU x 3.000 km = 15.000.000 

Leg 2: 10.000 CEU x 2.000 km = 20.000.000 

Leg 3: 0 CEU x 3.000 km = 0 

Total CEU: 35.000.000 

Fuel consumption 

Total consumption in tonnes Leg 1 + Leg 2 + Leg 3: VLSFO 1.250 + ULSFO 2.500 

Total CO2e in tonnes: (1.250 x 3,84) + (2.500 x 4,06) = 14.950 

Version 2 – November 2023 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intensity 

Gram CO2e per CEU-km: (14.950 x 1.000.000) / 35.000.000 = 427,14 

Ro-Pax 

Tonnekm (cargo freight) 

Leg 1: 15.000 tonnes x 3.000 km = 45.000.000 

Leg 2: 30.000 tonnes x 2.000 km = 60.000.000 

Leg 3: 0 tonnes x 3.000 km = 0 

Total tonne-km: 105.000.000 

Fuel consumption 

Total consumption in tonnes Leg 1 + Leg 2 + Leg 3: VLSFO 2.500 + ULSFO 5.000 

Total CO2e in tonnes: (2.500 x 3,84) + (5.000 x 4,06) = 29.900 

Share of transport activity assigned to cargo freight: 70 % 

CO2e in tonnes allocated to cargo freight: 28.125 x 0,7 = 20.930 

Intensity 

Gram CO2e per tonne-km: (20.930 x 1.000.000) / 105.000.000 = 199,33 

CEUkm (cargo freight) 

Leg 1: 5.000 CEU x 3.000 km = 15.000.000 

Leg 2: 10.000 CEU x 2.000 km = 20.000.000 

Leg 3: 0 CEU x 3.000 km = 0 

Total CEU: 35.000.000 

Fuel consumption 

Version 2 – November 2023 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total consumption in tonnes Leg 1 + Leg 2 + Leg 3: VLSFO 2.500 + ULSFO 5.000 

Total CO2e in tonnes: (2.500 x 3,84) + (5.000 x 4,06) = 29.900 

Share of transport activity assigned to cargo freight: 70 % 

CO2e in tonnes allocated to cargo freight: 29.900 x 0,7 = 20.930 

Intensity 

Gram CO2e per CEU-km: (20.930 x 1.000.000) / 35.000.000 = 598 

Scope 3 calculations 

Tonne-km based calculation 

A cargo owner deploying a vehicle carrier from port A to D. The carrier informs the cargo owner that the 
Actual Distance is applied for the intensity calculation. The carrier also informs the cargo owner about 
the Actual Distance from port A to D, in this example being 15000 km.  

This  distance  doesn’t  necessarily  need  to  reflect  the  Actual  Distance  of  the  actual  shipment  of  this 
particular cargo owner’s  cargo but may instead represent an ‘average Actual Distance’ for this route 
(port A to D) for the carrier in question.  

The cargo owner had 50 tonnes of cargo onboard transported from port A to D. 

TonneKm carried out on behalf of the cargo owner: 50 x 15.000 = 750.000  

Tonne CO2e footprint (142,38 x 750.000) / 1.000.000 = 106,79 tonnes of CO2e 

(A CEU-km based calculation would be carried out using the same logic) 

Suggested developments and revisions 

- 

Formation  and  establishment  of  a  Ro-Ro  buyer-supplier  initiative  that  follow  this  reporting 
standard  in  unity,  maintain  and  develop  its  methods,  and  potentially  report  via  a  central 
platform  to  both  minimize  efforts  of  bilateral  sharing,  and,  minimize  risks  of  non-standard 
compliant reporting procedures 
-  A third-party verification scheme 
- 
Tracking of Ro-Ro industry averages over time to relate to international targets 
-  Revision of Fuel Emission Factors (including renewable fuels/low emission fuels) 
- 

Introduction of a ‘split reporting system’ enabling renewable fuels to be reflected in cases where 
bunkering is done on behalf of the carrier itself (not assigned to specific cargo owners/shippers 
or LSPs) 

Version 2 – November 2023 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
