               TRANSPORT  

     SCIENCE-BASED  

TARGET SETTING          

           GUIDANCE

Developed by

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

ABOUT OUR TECHNICAL PARTNERS

This  guidance  was  developed  by  WWF  on  behalf  of  the  Science 
Based  Targets  initiative  (SBTi).  The  Science  Based  Targets  initiative 
mobilizes  companies  to  set  science-based  targets  and  boost  their 
competitive advantage in the transition to the low-carbon economy. It 
is a collaboration between CDP, the United Nations Global Compact, 
World Resources Institute (WRI) and the World Wide Fund for Nature 
(WWF) and one of the We Mean Business Coalition commitments.

For this project we counted on the support of three technical part-
ners  which  are  global  organizations  working  on  sustainability  and 
transport:

• Smart Freight Centre (SFC)
• Partnership on Sustainable, Low Carbon Transport (SLoCaT)
• International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT)

During the development of this work we also had the advice from 
technical experts: 

• Ecofys, a Navigant Company
• International Energy Agency (IEA)

A technical advisory group of dedicated experts from industry and 
NGOs  provided  detailed  input  during  the  planning  phase  and  on 
various drafts of the guidance and tool.  

A public workshop was organized in Paris in July 2017 to get input 
on key methodological choices from other stakeholders not directly 
engaged  in  the  project,  plus  two  consultation webinars were  held 
during the month of August 2017.

Primary authors: 
Irma Paola Delgado Luna, WWF
Fernando Rangel Villasana, WWF

Editor: 
Suzanne Greene, MIT Sustainable Logistics Initiative and Technical 
Advisor, Smart Freight Centre

Cover and back cover photos: © Michael Buckley / WWF-Canada

© 1986 Panda Symbol WWF - World Wide Fund For Nature (also known as World Wildlife Fund)

® “WWF” is a WWF Registered Trademark.

Smart Freight Centre (SFC) was established in 2013 
as a global non-profit organization leading the way 
to  a  more  efficient  and  environmentally  sustain-
able global freight and logistics sector. SFC works 
with businesses and other stakeholders to remove 
market barriers catalyzing sector-wide action to im-
prove  fuel  efficiency,  reduce  emissions  and  lower 
operating costs.

The Partnership on Sustainable, Low Carbon Trans-
port (SLoCaT) promotes the integration of sustain-
able  transport  in  global  policies  on  sustainable 
development  and  climate  change  and  leveraging 
action in support of the implementation of the glob-
al policies. SLoCaT consists of a multi-stakeholder 
partnership of over 90 organizations, which is sup-
ported by the SLoCaT Foundation.

The International Council on Clean Transportation is 
an  independent  nonprofit  organization  founded  to 
provide first-rate, unbiased research and technical 
and  scientific  analysis  to  environmental  regulators. 
Its mission is to improve the environmental perfor-
mance  and  energy  efficiency  of  road,  marine,  and 
air  transportation,  in  order  to  benefit  public  health 
and mitigate climate change.

CONTENT

1 

2 

About this guidance 

General guidance on science-based target-setting for transport 

2.1  Basic steps to use the SDA Transport tool 

2.2  Target formulation 

2.3  Target recalculation 

2.4  Tool boundaries and future improvements 

2.5  Data quality 

3	

User-specific	target-setting	guidance	

3.1  Companies that own / control vehicles 

3.2  Companies that subcontract / purchase transport services 

3.3  Road vehicle manufacturers 

3.4  Companies that manufacture road vehicle parts 

4  Methodological choices 

06

07

07

10

10

10

12

13

13

16

17

19

20

4.1  Selection of decarbonization scenarios from the International Energy Agency  20

4.2  Sectoral Decarbonization Approach (SDA) 

4.3  Carbon accounting methodologies 

4.4  Well to Wheel emissions boundary 

5 

ANNEX 

22

23

24

25

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 3

4 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance
Photo: © Michael Buckley / WWF-Canada

FOREWORD

Implementation of the Paris Agreement calls for ambitious climate action at global 
scale. The transition to a low/zero carbon economy is underway and accelerating 
globally. Every sector in every market is undergoing transformation. Non-state ac-
tors play a key role in driving change and already commenced to do so: so far more 
than  400  companies  have  joined  the  Science  Based  Targets  initiative  (SBTi)  and 
committed to set GHG emission reduction targets in line with the Paris Agreement 
goals. Leading businesses recognize this opportunity and the imperative to be part 
of the solution.  

The  transport  sector  must  not  lag  behind. Today  it  represents  23%  of  all  energy-
related global emissions and it is one of the fastest growing sectors.  The analysis 
of sectoral transformations implied by current Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDCs) shows that transport is one of the sectors where climate action ambition is 
particularly insufficient in the light of the requirements of mid-century Paris-compat-
ible transformations. And yet, decarbonizing the transport sector is feasible through 
disruptive technological innovation, land-use planning and transport demand man-
agement, modal shift and shifting to electric mobility, but we need to make it hap-
pen  faster.  Companies  setting  ambitious  science-based  targets  on  transport  can 
send a strong signal for local, regional and national policies to increase the level of 
ambition and steer the transition.

Science-based  targets  specify  how  much  and  how  quickly  a  company  needs  to 
reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to future-proof its growth. This report does 
not present a new approach; it is based on current science-based target methods, 
and GHG accounting standards. It shows the conclusions of a group of experts (in-
dustry and non-industry representatives) that have over the past year focused on 
developing best practices for science-based target-setting in the transport sector. 
By  using  the  Sectoral  Decarbonization  Approach-  Transport  tool  and  this  report, 
companies can get on track with a well-below 2°C world.

Thanks to its holistic vision and international network, WWF, the world’s foremost 
NGO dedicated to nature conservation, active in over 100 countries, calls for strong 
action to prepare and radically transform the transport systems around the world 
towards a decarbonized economy.

Special thanks to our Technical Partners, Advisors and Consultative Group mem-
bers for contributing to the realization of this project.  

Pascal Canfin
CEO, WWF France

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 5

1

ABOUT THIS GUIDANCE

This document supports companies that are interested in 
setting  science-based  targets  for  transport  greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions according to the new, refined path-
ways in the Sector Decarbonization Approach (SDA) Trans-
port tool (Learn more about the SDA method and tool in 
Section 4.3). It builds on the existing manual and guidance 
of  the  Science  Based  Targets  initiative  (SBTi)  for  setting 
science-based targets.

The underlying data in the SDA Transport tool are sourced 
from  the  detailed  transport  pathways  in  the  International 
Energy Agency’s (IEA) Mobility Model (MoMo)1. The emis-
sions scenarios embedded in the SDA tool are the 2°C sce-
nario (2DS) and the Beyond 2°C scenario (B2DS). 

This document contains guidance on how to set targets for 
transport emissions across different emissions scopes and 
for  different  tool  end-users.  Examples  of  end-users  are: 
passenger transport companies, logistics service providers, 
shippers, carriers, postal companies, road vehicle manufac-
turers, auto part manufacturers, and in general companies 
with large transport emissions in their value chain. 

Policymakers  can  also  use  this  guidance  to  inform  the  
development of transport programs and regulations.

The  Guidance  is  divided  into  three  chapters.  Chapter  2 
is a user’s general guidance on the transport categories 
included in the tool, the data to use in the target model-
ing  exercise  and  the  output  users  can  expect  to  obtain. 
Chapter 3 contains more specific guidance per end-user, 
divided into companies that own or control a fleet of ve-
hicles,  companies  that  manufacture  new  road  vehicles, 
companies  with  large  transport  emissions  in  their  value 
chain  and  companies  that  manufacture  road  vehicle 
parts. The  type  of  guidance  provided  is  GHG  emissions 
that the company should estimate to model a target -in-
cluding aggregation of emissions scopes to obtain Well-
to-Wheel (WTW) emissions-, definitions of activity units, 
the approaches a company can use to set science-based 
targets, and the interpretation of results derived with the 
SDA Transport tool. 

Finally Chapter 4 describes the methodological choices made 
to build the tool and to produce this Guidance document. 

1 

IEA (2017), Mobility Model, August 2017 version, database and simulation model, www.iea.org/etp/etpmodel/transport/

6 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

2

GENERAL GUIDANCE ON SCIENCE-BASED  
TARGET-SETTING FOR TRANSPORT

2.1  BASIC STEPS TO USE THE SDA TRANSPORT TOOL

1 

Identify the transport categories you will need to model your company’s target. 
The following transport categories are available in the tool: 

Table 1. Transport pathways available in the SDA Transport tool

Tool end-users

Type of transport-
related emissions

Transport category

Description

Companies that own / 
control vehicles 

Passenger transport 
emissions

2-3 Wheelers

Companies that subcon-
tract/ purchase transport 
services

Light duty vehicles (LDV)

Buses 

Mini-buses 

Urban rail 2

Non-urban rail

All motorized vehicles having two or three 
wheels aimed at the mobility of persons 
on all types of roads

All motorized vehicles having four wheels 
aimed at the mobility of persons on all 
types of roads, up to nine persons per 
vehicle and 3.5 t of gross vehicle weight

Buses (more than nine seats) and BRT 
systems (Bus Rapid Transit)

Minibuses

Metros, high capacity/high frequency 
commuter rail services, tramways and 
light rail 3

High-speed rail (intercity rail services 
crossing long distances between sta-
tions and having a maximum speed that 
exceeds 250 km/h)

2 

3 

 While countries may define rail modes different, the SBTi adopts the definitions from the Rail Handbook (2017) from the IEA and the International Union of 
Railways (UIC).
• Metros are urban rail transport services with short headways and high commercial speed operated by vehicles specifically designed for high capacity 
transport (e.g. including standing passengers and a large number of doors to enable rapid boarding and operations), running on an exclusive right-of-way 
urban network with regular station spacing, without any interference from other traffic or level crossings, and often developed as an underground and/or 
elevated network. 
• Commuter rail includes heavy rail services operating in urban areas and at the boundary between urban and suburban areas, primarily to serve trans-
port needs of commuters needing access to urban environments. 
• Tramways and light rail, i.e. urban guided transport systems with extensive segregated network sections, mostly at-grade.

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 7

All motorized vehicles having two or three 
wheels aimed at the mobility of goods on 
all types of roads

Pickups, vans and small trucks with a 
gross vehicle weight (GVW) of less than 
3.5 t, used for the transportation of goods 4

Commercial vehicles with a GVW from 
3.5 t to 15 t; they include small lorries, rigid 
trucks and tractor-trailers as well as large 
vans 6

Commercial vehicles with a gross vehicle 
weight (GVW) greater than 15 tonnes (t), 
they typically serve long-haul delivery of 
goods, have from two or more axles and a 
power rating of between 200 and 600 kW

Trains to transport goods in dedicated or 
shared rail tracks

Passenger cruises. 
Maritime transport activities (domestic 
and international marine bunkers; contain-
erized and non- containerized)

Air transport activities (commercial and 
non-commercial flights for passenger and 
freight)

WTW emissions related to the use-phase 
of original equipment manufacturers 
(OEMs)

Table 1. (continuing)

Tool end-users

Type of transport-
related emissions

Freight transport  
emissions

Transport category

Description

2-3 Wheelers

Light commercial vehicles (LCV)

Medium freight trucks (MFTs) 5

Heavy freight trucks (HFTs) 7

Rail  8

Aviation & Shipping  
emissions

Sea  transport 

Air transport 

Companies that 
manufacture new 
road vehicles

Emissions from new 
vehicles

Passenger- New light duty vehicles

Freight- New light commercial  vehicles

Freight- New medium freight trucks

Freight- New heavy freight trucks

Passenger- New light duty vehicles  
(Fuel economy)

Fuel economy of OEMs -the related 
emissions are tank-to-wheel (TTW)

Freight- New light commercial vehicles 
(Fuel economy)

Freight- New medium freight trucks  
(Fuel economy)

Freight- New heavy freight trucks  
(Fuel economy)

Note: This document also provides general guidance for companies that manufacture road vehicle parts (See Section 3.4).

4 

In general, the LCV fleet consists of vans, chassis cab-style vehicles, small open lorries and pickup trucks. They are used for a variety of tasks, including 
small-scale ‘last-mile’ deliveries, such as a postal or commercial delivery services, and for transporting industrial goods and building materials to and from 
work sites. They are also used to provide services, such as repairs, plumbing and heating, and office support.

5  Definitions provided in the report: “The Future of Trucks” (IEA, 2017).
6  They tend to perform regional operations but also include public and commercial service vehicles, such as garbage trucks or fire-fighting trucks. In coun-
tries with a less-developed highway network infrastructure, the function of some MFTs is similar to that of heavy-freight trucks: they are used in long-haul 
operations and for transporting goods from central distribution hubs (warehouses and ports) to their final destinations, such as retail firms, or for transport-
ing bulk building materials and resources.

7  Together, HFTs and MFTs comprise heavy-duty trucks.
8  The MoMo definition leaves open specifications of speed, distance and wagon type. This category also includes road trains: multiple trailers pulled by a 

single tractor unit.

8 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

2	 Define	a	commitment	period.	As per the SBTi criteria all targets must cover a minimum of 5 years and a maxi-
mum of 15 years from the date the target is submitted to the SBTi for an official validation. The SBTi recom-
mends choosing the most recent year for which data is available as the base year, taking into consideration the 
representativeness  of  the year  to your  company’s  operations.  Preferably,  the  selected  base  and  target year 
should ensure forward-looking ambition of an emissions reduction target, rather than covering emissions re-
ductions achieved to date. The earliest base year that can be selected by the company in the tool is 2010 and 
the latest target year is 2050. Companies are encouraged to develop long-term targets (e.g. 2050) in addition to 
mid-term targets.

3  Collect all base year data required to model a target with the tool. Collect all data per transport category for 

your global operations for the selected base year.

Table 2. Required data to use the SDA Transport tool

WTW base 
year GHG 
emissions 
(CO2e)

Base year activity

Informative

Passenger-
kilometer
(pkm)

Tonne-
kilometer
(tkm)

Vehicle-
kilometer 
(vkm)

Base year fuel  
economy: 
Liters of gasoline  
equivalent (lge)/ 100 Km

Type of transport-related  
emissions

Companies that  
own / control  
vehicles 

Companies that  
subcontract/ purchase 
transport services

Passenger

Freight

Aviation  
and  
Shipping

Companies that  
manufacture new road 
vehicles

Passenger

Freight

4  Estimate the activity in the target year: Project the activity for the selected target year. For example by calculat-
ing the growth rate based on historical data or by using future growth rates as estimated by the company. Alterna-
tively, you may project your activity for the selected target year by applying the default growth rate of the transport 
category selected which is provided in the tool. 

5  Select the type of transport-related emissions. The types of transport-related emissions available in the tool 

are: passenger transport, freight transport, emissions from new vehicles and aviation and shipping. 

6  Select a transport category and enter required data. The SDA Transport tool allows the modeling of targets for 
a single transport category at a time. When users select a transport category from the dropdown menu, the tool 
will automatically show the input data you will need to enter. Users are required to fill-in all fields with their data as 
per previous steps 9. 

7  Review the target-modeling results. The SDA Transport tool currently models targets using two emissions sce-
narios (2DS and B2DS). For more information on emissions scenarios and the Mobility Model please consult Sec-
tion 4.2. Two sections are shown below the input section, one for each scenario. The tables summarize the emis-
sions and emissions intensity in the base year and target year selected, as calculated by the SDA Transport tool. 
The tool also produces graphs showing the emissions intensity pathway of the transport category if available, and 
the carbon budget for the company. All pathways provided in the tool are global pathways.

9  Fields labeled “Well to Tank emissions in base year” and “Tank to Wheel emissions in base year” are optional. 

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 9

2.2  TARGET FORMULATION

Target formulations must indicate the emissions covered, 
the base year and target year selected, the percentage re-
duction and the units. As per the SBTi criteria, targets can 
be expressed on an absolute basis (tCO2e) or intensity ba-
sis (e.g. gCO2e/pkm, tCO2e/tkm). 

Shorter statements are clearer and more transparent. Ac-
tivities, strategies or additional information (e.g. percentage 
of electric vehicle sales) can be part of other documents, 
like sustainability reports. Example:

Company A commits to reduce its scope 1, 2 and 
3  emissions  (from  upstream  transportation  and 
distribution) 40% by 2030 from a 2017 base-year.

Company B commits to reduce its scope 1, 2 and 
3 emissions (from fuel and energy related activi-
ties) per passenger-kilometer 35% by 2025 from a 
2015 base-year. 

2.3  TARGET RECALCULATION 

To ensure consistent performance tracking over time, the 
target should be recalculated to reflect significant chang-
es that would compromise its relevance and consistency. 
The  SBTi  recommends  that  companies  check  the  valid-
ity of their target projections annually. At a minimum, tar-
gets should be reassessed every five years. The company 
should  notify  the  SBTi  (if  participating  in  the  initiative)  of 
any  significant  changes  and  report  these  major  changes 
publicly.

A  target  recalculation  should  be  triggered  by  significant 
changes in:

•  Company structure (e.g. acquisition, divestiture, 

mergers, insourcing or outsourcing)

•  Growth projections

Companies setting a target for multiple passenger trans-
port categories or multiple freight transport categories can 
aggregate the tool results to obtain a single GHG reduc-
tion target by using weighted averages. 

To  participate  in  the  SBTi,  companies  need  to  complete 
a submission form. The form requires disclosure of emis-
sions per scope in the base year, activity figures, and other 
data  to  perform  the  assessment.  The  SBTi  also  recom-
mends  providing  detailed  information  such  as  regional-
ized targets, percentage of vehicles sales per power train, 
occupancy rates or load factors used, etc. All information 
is treated as confidential and is only used for the purpose 
of  assessing  compliance  against  current  science-based 
target methods and SBTi criteria. 

For resources related to the SBTi Call to Action, the busi-
ness case for science based targets and other available 
materials, please consult: 

http://sciencebasedtargets.org/resources/

•  Data used in setting the target (e.g. discovery of 

significant errors or a number of cumulative errors 
that are collectively significant)

•  Other assumptions used with science-based 

target-setting methods 

The SBTi reserves the right to withdraw or adjust the tool 
at  any  time  for  updates  and/or  amendments  to  its  cal-
culations  or  third-party  data.  Adjustments  can  include 
changes to the decarbonization pathways embedded in 
the tool, which need to reflect model improvements and 
changes in the remaining carbon budget available as the 
world  strives  to  mitigate  GHG  emissions  across  all  sec-
tors  in  the  economy.  For  further  details  please  refer  to 
the terms of use and disclaimer in the SDA transport tool.

2.4  TOOL BOUNDARIES AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS

The  embedded  decarbonization  pathways  in  the  tool  are 
those  of  the  International  Energy  Agency’s  (IEA)  Mobil-
ity Model (MoMo)  10. The pathways cover WTW emissions 
expressed  as  CO2-equivalent  11,  this  includes  the  footprint 
of electricity in electric vehicles. The WTT part covers the 
emissions  of  fossil  fuels  and  biofuels  12,  yet  it  excludes 

land use change (LUC) emissions. The possibility of adding  
LUC  emissions  to  the  pathways was  explored,  as  MoMo 
provides an estimate (not in the default figures). Due to the 
high  uncertainty  associated  with  LUC  emissions,  a  deci-
sion was made to exclude them from the underlying de-
carbonization pathways for the time being. 

10 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

However, this is almost entirely ameliorated since LUC is 
included in neither the base year nor the future year of the 
scenario, so the relative change is not all that different. Also, 
both the GHG Protocol Scope 3 Standard and the Product 
Standard, require companies to use Life Cycle Analysis to 
calculate  emissions  and  removals  from  biogenic  sourc-
es,  non-biogenic  sources  and  land-use  change  impacts, 
when applicable (e.g. sectors with scarce opportunities to 
decarbonize such as aviation, shipping and long-haul road 
transportation). 

This  means  that  while  the  scenarios  defining  the  decar-
bonization rate do not include LUC, companies must use 
WTW accounting including LUC in calculating their emis-
sions. Thus, companies are inherently incentivized against 
shifting to high carbon biofuels, as this would either have 
a limited reduction potential or actually increase emissions 
after LUC is included.

Since methods to calculate LUC can widely differ, compa-
nies should disclose the method used to calculate these 
impacts in the inventory report. It is important to note that 
bioenergy (aka biogenic) emissions and removals  13 must 
be reported within the WTW boundary, to accurately re-
flect emissions reductions across time. 

Also, the embedded decarbonization pathways in the tool 
models are global, meaning the tool provides no regional 
focus. This does not mean that the company will have to 
use a global emission factor for their activities in different 
regions in their reporting, but that it will converge to a glob-
al pathway when using the SDA Transport tool. 

Although  this  might  be  perceived  as  not  equitable  for 
companies  with  electric  vehicles  operating  in  countries 
with  low-carbon  grid  electricity,  it  does  provide  the  right 
incentive to penetrate those markets. 

Some companies operating only in developed countries 
might already be below the global intensity pathways for 
the sector. It can also be that country sector-targets con-

sidered in the National Determined Contributions (NDCs) 
or national regulations are more stringent than the glob-
al  sector  pathways  in  this  tool.  In  these  cases,  the  SBTi 
strongly encourages companies to use regional or coun-
try  pathways  that  are  more  ambitious  than  the  global 
pathway. 

Some  potential  improvements  to  be  considered  for  a  
second phase of this project include:

Inclusion of 1.5°C scenarios, when available
Inclusion of LUC emissions guidance

• 
• 
•  Development of regional pathways for transport 

modes that operate only at the national or regional 
level

•  Development of transport pathways for subsectors 
not currently covered by the tool, for example river 
transportation which is relevant in some geogra-
phies

•  More in-depth study and refinement of the aviation 
(e.g. inclusion of non-CO2-forcings) and shipping 
sector 

In  addition,  it  is  desirable  to  explore  a  more  holistic  ap-
proach  for  vehicle  manufacturers  to  also  consider  emis-
sions from materials sourcing and the impacts across the 
value chain due to the uptake of new technologies. 

Since  reducing  transport  emissions  requires  a  profound 
transformation of mobility and freight services, apart from 
setting  science-based  targets,  companies  together  with 
other  stakeholders  need  to  identify  concrete  actions  as 
well as understand the challenges, the opportunities and 
the  enabling  conditions  at  different  scales  to  succeed  in 
this  task  to  decarbonize  the  sector.  Several  international 
initiatives 14 launched since COP21 are exploring their com-
plementarities  and  committed  to  scale-up  bold  action 
at  different  levels.  These  initiatives  are  producing  global 
macro-road maps, national road maps, evaluating the ef-
fectiveness  of  mitigation  actions  and  actively  engaging 
with companies. 

10  Except for Aviation and Shipping; for these two sectors, the tool calculates targets based on the absolute emissions reductions recommended by the 

IPCC at the global level (IPCC, 2014).

11  Best practice for GHG reporting and science-based target-setting is to use CO2equivalent across all scopes (scopes 1, 2 and 3). For the purpose of joining 

the initiative, emissions exclusions cannot be greater than 5%.

12  Largely based on data from the Joint Research Centre, EUCAR and CONCAWE (JEC, 2014).
13  The GHG Protocol Accounting and Reporting Standard for scope 1 and 2 emissions recommends to report biogenic emissions outside the scopes, but as 

an item in the company’s GHG inventory. The WTW approach commonly used in the transport sector does not make such a distinction. 

14  For example: The Paris Process on Mobility and Climate (PPMC), led by Movin’On (successor of former “Michelin Challenge Bibendum”) and the Partner-

ship on Sustainable, Low Carbon Transport (SLoCaT);  The “Decarbonising Transport” initiative of the International Transport Forum (ITF) and The Deep 
Decarbonization Pathways Project for Transport (DDPP-T) led by the Institute for Sustainable Development and International Relations (IDDRI).

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 11

2.5  DATA QUALITY

Companies  must  use  data  that  is  most  representative  of 
the  actual  fuel  and  energy  consumption.  Default  activity 
data is acceptable, but they are less accurate and limit a 
company’s ability to truly track performance and progress 
towards targets. Thus, when used, the source and potential 
uncertainty of the adopted default data should be clearly 
disclosed. 

Companies should collect high quality (‘primary’) data from 
suppliers  and  other  value  chain  partners  for  scope  3  ac-
tivities  deemed  most  relevant  (i.e.  emissions  hotspots  by 
mode or region) and/or strategically targeted for GHG re-
ductions. Chapter 7 of the GHG Protocol Scope 3 Standard  

provides further guidance on data quality issues; the Glob-
al  Logistics  Emissions  Council  (GLEC)  Framework  offers 
additional details for freight transport.

Regardless  of  the  limitations  around  data  quality,  com-
panies  are  encouraged  to  set  science-based  targets  as 
soon  as  possible  to  have  a  likely  chance  to  reach  the 
goals of the Paris Agreement. Companies can have tar-
gets  in  place  while  continue  to  improve  their  reporting 
through  collaboration  with  suppliers.  Any  resulting  ad-
justments  that  lead  to  increases  or  decreases  in  emis-
sions  due  to  improvements  in  data  quality  needs  to  be 
transparent and justified.

12 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

3

USER-SPECIFIC TARGET-SETTING GUIDANCE

3.1  COMPANIES THAT OWN / CONTROL VEHICLES 

3.1.1  GHG emissions and activity

The  emissions  trajectories  in  the  Mobility  Model  (MoMo) 
are  derived  from  a  series  of  mode  specific  technologi-
cal  and  efficiency  assumptions  embedded  in  the  model 
across time. Although the SDA Transport tool uses these 
trajectories to assign targets to companies, the aim is not 
to prescribe any mitigation option in particular but to reach 
the emissions reductions required within a given tempera-
ture scenario to limit the most dangerous impacts of cli-
mate change.  

To use the tool, companies must use WTW emissions ac-
counting for all their transport operations. Usually compa-
nies  adhere  to  the  GHG  reporting  guidance  of  the  GHG 
Protocol. 

Figure  1  shows  the  approximate  equivalence  between 
the  scopes  used  in  the  GHG  Protocol  and  the  WTW  
accounting.

Figure 1 Aggregation of scopes to obtain Well-to-Wheel emissions

Well-to-Wheel  
(WTW) 
emissions

Scope 1
(direct emissions from 
fuel combustion)

Scope 2
(indirect emissions from 
electricity generation, 
consumed in EVs)

Scope 3, Category 3
(indirect fuel -and energy-  
related emissions not in-
cluded in scope 1 or scope 2)

Note: Tank-to-Wheel emissions are equivalent to scope 1 emissions. 

Emissions  from  ports,  storage  rooms  and  other  support-
ive  facilities  and  services  should  be  reported  under  the 
appropriate  scope  in  the  company’s  GHG  inventory.  For 
the  purpose  of  the  modeling  exercise,  these  should  be 
excluded when using the SDA Transport tool. Companies 
can in fact, use other methods (sectorial or not-sectorial) to 
model targets for the company’s non-transport emissions. 
In the end, the expectation is that company-wide targets 
will be set covering all GHG emissions sources. 

MoMo  activity  projections  per  transport  mode  are  ex-
pressed either in passenger-kilometer (pkm) or tonne-ki-
lometer units (tkm). The emissions intensity pathways con-
structed in the SDA Transport tool use these units, which 
are  based  on  global  average  occupancy  rates  and  load 
factors embedded in MoMo (See Annex II).

BOX 1. GLEC Framework Guidance – idling,  
repositioning and empty running 

All emissions related to the operation of vehicles 
should be included in the base year emissions of 
the  company.  This  includes  the  emissions  from 
idling,  repositioning  and  empty  running.  This  is 
common practice for scope 1 and scope 2 report-
ing, where empty running and idling is inherently 
included vis a vis the actual fuel use.

Carbon  intensity  calculations  should  take  the 
total  amount  of  fuel  used  for  both  loaded  and 
empty trips and divide it by the tonne-kilometers 
related  to  the  actual  useful work  done  (e.g.,  the 
loaded trips).

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 13

When using the tool, companies will be asked to provide 
pkm  or  tkm  figures  for  all  their  global  operations  in  the 
base year and target year selected. Companies may in-
clude the operating personnel in their pkm figures. Gen-
erally,  passenger  transport  companies  use  the  metric 
“revenue  passenger  kilometer”  which  is  the  number  of 
kilometers  traveled  by  paying  passengers  (number  of 
revenue passengers multiplied by the total distance trav-
eled).  Likewise,  companies  may  include  the  operating 
personnel and extra fuel when optionally carried in their 
tkm figures. 

This is the so called “payload distance” which refers only 
to revenue-generating cargo. Companies should publical-
ly disclose the assumptions on occupancy rates and load 
factors used to estimate their inventory’s figures. 

MoMo considers a number of decarbonization measures 
that  impact  the  global  growth  demand  assumption,  in-
cluding “shift” and “avoid” measures. The extent to which  
polices drive measures leading  to avoidance of transport 
activity  or  modal  shifts  is  different  in  the  2DS  and  B2DS, 
therefore requiring different levels of policy interventions 
and technology deployment.

3.1.2  Target-setting approaches & results interpretation

The principle of intensity convergence is used for almost 
all transport categories available in the tool (except avia-
tion and shipping). The convergence approach is applied 
to  homogeneous  sectors  (sectors  that  can  be  described 
with  a  common  metric,  eg.  tkm,  pkm),  and  assumes  that 
the carbon intensity of a company converges towards the 
carbon  intensity  of  the  sector  at  a  rate  that  ensures  not 
exceeding  the  emissions  scenario  carbon  budget.  The 
carbon budget can be that for 2ºC, well-below 2°C, or any 
other emissions scenario embedded in the tool. 

Therefore,  companies  using  the  tool  for  transport  activi-
ties should interpret the resulting goal as a function of the 
company’s initial carbon intensity, the sector’s decarbon-
ization  trajectory  (e.g.  for  2°C  or  well  below  2°C)  and  the 
company’s projected growth relative to the growth of the 
sector. The growth projection of the company is taken into 
account  to  estimate  the  market  share  parameter  in  the 
convergence equation. 

Figure 2 shows the graphic interpretation of the emissions 
intensity convergence approach.

Figure 2. Intensity convergence approach

The rate of intensity decarbonization is not the same for all 
companies within  the  sector.  It  is  also  important  to  men-
tion that for companies already below the sector’s intensity 
can still converge towards the sector’s intensity in 2050, or 
continue  a  decarbonization  trajectory  below  the  sector’s 
average without necessarily converging in 2050. As men-
tioned before, the sector trajectory is a global one, which 
intrinsically  requires  companies  below  the  sector’s  aver-
age to continue on such trend.

 Aviation & Shipping

Aviation and shipping are an interesting case in the trans-
port sector due to their international presence and the exis-
tence of global decarbonization goals for these two. In the 
case of aviation, the Air Transport Action Group (ATAG) set 
environmental goals for the short, medium and long-term in 
2016, including: an annual efficiency goal for 2020, a goal to 
stabilize emissions growth from 2020 with the use of offsets, 
and  to  reduce  net  emissions  from  aviation  50%  by  2050 
compared to a 2005 base-year (ATAG, 2018). 

Since  the  SBTi  does  not  allow  the  use  of  offsets  to  report 
progress against science-based targets, and since the sec-
tor’s  50%  reduction  goal  (if  interpreted  as  gross  emissions) 
is  comparable  to  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate 
Change (IPCC) 2°C minimum requirement at the global level, 
the SDA Transport tool uses a linear interpretation of the IPCC 
2°C range which is between 49 and 72% reduction 15.

Therefore,  the  tool  only  asks  for  tCO2e  figures  from  air 
transport-related activities in the base year, and no activity 
figures, as the target-setting approach is contraction. This 
approach requires all companies within a given sector, re-
gion or globally to reduce emissions at the same rate. The 
contraction approach will result in a company’s trajectory 
parallel to the sector, regardless of the company’s starting 
carbon footprint. 

14 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

Figure 3 shows the graphic interpretation of the absolute 
emissions contraction approach.

Figure 3. Absolute emissions contraction approach.

In  the  case  of  shipping,  the  International  Maritime  Organi-
zation (IMO) recently reached an agreement for the sector 
that includes as for aviation, a target on emissions intensity 
by 2030, and a long term target to reduce emissions at least 
50%  by  2050  compared  to  a  2008  base-year  (Greenbiz, 
2018). The level of ambition for the sector goal may be in-
creased in the future as negotiations continue, and in light 
with the 1.5°C upcoming IPCC report. 

For the same reasons than for aviation and to boost ambi-
tion in the short-term, the SDA Transport tool also uses the 
IPCC reduction range 49-72% (linear trajectory) to calculate 
targets  for  shipping  activities. This  range  may  be  updated 
with the introduction of new science. Also, the SBTi will re-
view  new  emissions  trajectories  for  these  sectors  as  they 
become available, for potential integration into the tool.

Manuel Pulgar-Vidal, leader of WWF’s global climate and 
energy  programme,  said:  “The  new  goal  of  IMO  is  very 
welcome news, a good first step and an important policy 
signal. Shipping is responsible for more than 2 per cent 
of global emissions, and this is growing. The agreement 
today  is  an  opportunity  to  bend  this  curve  to  align with 
the Paris Agreement, but it needs to translate into urgent 
action - now.” 

Even when using the contraction approach, a company can 
define  an  intensity  target. The  SBT  tool  calculates  the  re-
quired absolute emissions trajectory towards a target year. 
Together  with  sector-wide  or  company-specific  growth 
projections,  an  intensity  target  can  be  calculated  using 
the absolute emissions target level from the SBT tool and 
the  company’s  projected  activity  in  the  target year. When 
companies commit to such an intensity target, it is essential 
to  regularly  review  the  growth  projections. This  should  be 
done at least every five years, ideally even in shorter cycles. 
In addition, companies may not set a weaker target in the 
case of negative growth. 

BOX 2. Recommendations for companies that own / control vehicles 

• 

• 

• 

Logistics service providers, shippers and carriers using more than one 
transport mode (multimodal) would need to model their targets by 
using each of the transport modes in which it operates, by providing 
the share of activity for each of these and the projected growth. Since 
projections can change over time, companies are recommended to 
check the validity of their targets every five years, and adjust the  
targets accordingly. 

Companies are encouraged to consider different mitigation options in 
line with the “avoid, shift and improve” concept.

Companies are also encouraged to develop strategies to improve their 
service efficiency (for example, increasing the number of passenger 
per kilometer or the number of tonnes per kilometer as allowed by  
local regulations).

15  The range of percent decrease in emissions is due to uncertainty in emissions modeling projections. Additionally, a decrease of 49% is actually the lower 
threshold when recognizing that global net negative emissions would be required (-103 to -118%) in the second half of the century; Table 6.3 in Chapter 6 
of the Fifth Assessment Report, Working Group III).

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 15

3.2  COMPANIES THAT SUBCONTRACT / PURCHASE 

TRANSPORT SERVICES

3.2.1  GHG emissions and activity

Emissions  from  transport  activities  that  occur  in  a  com-
pany’s  value  chain  are  indirect  emissions  (scope  3)  that 
are reported by the company buying the services to fulfill 
its core business operations. These emissions are gener-
ally emissions from logistics operations (e.g. transportation 
of  raw  materials  or  finished  products)  or  business  travel. 
Companies using the SDA Transport tool for their scope 3 
emissions in the value chain can use the trajectories avail-
able for companies that own / control vehicles.

Figure 4. Transport activities in the value chain (scope 3)

Passenger  
transport

Freight  
transport

Scope 3.  
Categories  
in the GHG  
Protocol

Category 6:  
Business travel

Category 7:  
Employee  
commuting

Category 4:  
Upstream transportation 
and distribution

Category 9:  
Downstream transporta-
tion and distribution

Emissions and activity data (pkm or tkm) can be challeng-
ing  to  obtain  for  subcontracted  transport.  However,  the 
GLEC  Framework  provides  guidance  on  how  companies 
can estimate these figures from supplier’s data. Neverthe-
less, in some cases it might be necessary to rely on default 
data that may not accurately represent actual transporta-
tion activities. Despite uncertainty, companies are encour-
aged to set targets while continue improving data quality.

As for scope 1 and 2, default data life cycle emissions fac-
tors should be considered as they normally include WTT 
and TTW emissions.

BOX 3. GLEC Framework Guidance – scope 3 guid-
ance for idling, reposition and empty running 

The GLEC Framework suggests three options for 
including  idling,  reposition  and  empty  running 
in  scope  3  absolute  emissions  calculations  (e.g. 
tonnes CO2e):

a)  Adopt an average load factor (e.g. 50%). If 

using a default factor, such as from Defra or 
the GLEC Framework, adjustments for empty 
running, repositioning and idling are embed-
ded in the default values. 

b)  Adopt a company or region-specific load fac-
tor based on actual operating conditions. 

c)  Scale by loaded distances by appropriate  

factors to consider empty running.

In the case of logistics, the Smart Freight Centre through 
the GLEC Framework and other organizations are creat-
ing new collaboration platforms to gather more accurate 
/ granular data in the supply chain: 

http://www.smartfreightcentre.org/

3.2.2  Target-setting approaches & results interpretation

For categories 4 and 9 in the GHG Protocol, upstream and 
downstream  transportation  and  distribution,  companies 
can use the SDA Transport tool with the convergence ap-
proach  for  GHG  target-setting.  Alternatively,  companies 
may  use  the  contraction  approach with  the  IPCC  5th AR 
reduction range mentioned before. This second approach 
is recommended for transport emissions in the value chain 
when activity data is not available.

The  SBTi  also  accepts  supplier  engagement  targets  to 
mainstream  science-based  targets  in  the  value  chain  16.  
A target language example is: 

Company A commits to have 70% of its key sup-
pliers by emissions (including transporting servic-
es) setting science-based targets by 2020. 

For Categories 6 and 7, business travel and employee com-
muting,  an  absolute  approach  is  recommended  with  the 
IPCC  5th  AR  reduction  range.  Although  companies  could 
use the tool with the convergence approach to determine 
a  target  for  these  categories  if  emissions  and  activity  data 
is available, the limited market share attributed in the tool to 
employee commuting and business travel will result in inap-
propriate targets; especially if the travel is sporadic. 

16  Please consult the SBTi criteria on supplier engagement targets.

16 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

 
BOX 4. Recommendations for companies that subcontract / purchase transport services

• 

• 

• 

In order to meet the 2DS and B2DS for freight transportation, systemic improvements in the near 
term are required. For example, by taking action in the supply chain, improving logistics and rout-
ing, and by deploying energy efficiency measures. Collaboration and coordination among shippers, 
logistics service providers and carriers is therefore crucial to decarbonize freight transport despite 
a projected growth in demand. 

Companies are implementing strategies to reduce emissions from air travel, as it is one of the 
most carbon intensive modes. They do so, for example, by promoting the use of online meetings 
and web conferencing, and by implementing internal policies for employee travel. It is expected 
that corporate users of air travel compare the service providers in the market, not only based on 
economic factors, but also on environmental ones (e.g. preference for companies with a climate 
strategy including science-based targets).

Companies are starting to implement car-sharing programs with employees, to reduce emissions 
and to promote employee integration. Other strategies are based on incentive schemes to encour-
age employees to bike, walk or take the train to work.

3.3  ROAD VEHICLE MANUFACTURERS

3.3.1  GHG emissions & activity

Use phase emissions from newly manufactured vehicles 
are  indirect  emissions  (scope  3)  that  are  reported  by  the 
manufacturing company that sells the vehicles. Use phase 
emissions of vehicle manufacturers is therefore part of the 
transport carbon budget. The SDA Transport tool only has 
pathways  for  road  vehicle  manufacturers  (WTW).  Emis-
sions  during  manufacturing  are  not  covered  in  the  SDA 
Transport tool, nor emissions from battery manufacturing 
for electric vehicles. 

Figure 5. Emissions covered in the pathways  
for newly manufactured vehicles.

Well-to-Wheel  
(WTW) 
emissions

Scope 3, Category 11
Use of Sold Products

Note: As per the GHG Scope 3 Standard, Category 11 includes the total 
expected lifetime emissions from all relevant products sold in the reporting 
year across the company’s product portfolio. A reporting company’s scope 
3 emissions from use of sold products include the scope 1 and scope 2 
emissions of end users, and it uses life cycle emission factors for fuels and 
for electricity.

Road vehicle manufacturers are required to test the emis-
sions generation from the exhaust of newly produced ve-
hicles.  Different  test  procedures  can  yield  performance 
figures that do not correspond to actual driving emissions. 

Fuel economy of LDVs: The values used in the embedded 
pathways in MoMo are estimated through a normalization 
of regional test procedures to the Worldwide Harmonized 
Test Cycle (WLTP), based on the conversion factors devel-
oped by ICCT (ICCT, 2014)  17. The assumed gap between 
the WLTP and real-world (on-road) emissions is 1.1 for all 
regions and at all times.

According to the IEA (OECD/IEA, 2017), to be able to meet 
the 2DS targets, it is necessary to reduce the gap between 
tested  and  on-road  fuel  economy.  Moving  towards  the 
WLTP  would  better  reflect  real-world  vehicle  operation. 
Therefore,  for  science-based  target-setting,  companies 
must use the adjustment factors / formulas of the WLTP to 
obtain real / actual emissions if using a different standard.

17  The IEA specifically used equation 4.2 (Single regression with zero intercept – all data), with the slopes given in table 5.2 (Single regression with  

zero intercept)..

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 17

Fuel economy of HDVs: From the IEA’s report The Future 
of Trucks (IEA, 2017): “Estimations of the fuel economies for 
LCVs, MFTs and HFTs relied primarily on research on test-
ed and real-world specific fuel consumption under various 
drive cycles, vehicle loads and mission profiles, largely le-
veraging on the analysis recently developed by the ICCT 
for  the  Global  Fuel  Economy  Initiative  (GFEI,  2016),  com-
plemented by information on the fuel consumption of ve-
hicles reported by communities of vehicle users, such as 
those reviewed by Tietge et al. (2015) in the case of cars.” 

As with  LDVs,  for  LCVs  a  1.1  conversion  factor  is  used  in 
the MoMo and the values are for the WLTP test cycle. For 
MFTs and HFTs, the values are real-world operations, un-
der representative loads.

In absence of a normalized test procedure for MFTs and 
HFTs,  companies  are  invited  to  present  and  justify  their 
own estimates /  simulations based on fuel consumption 
specific duty cycles to the SBTi. 

Well-to-Wheel emissions

The  emissions  pathways  built  in  the  SDA  Transport  tool 
for the manufacturing of new road vehicles is composed 
by WTT emissions from stock vehicles, and by TTW emis-
sions  for  new  vehicles  (mix  of  power  trains).  The  former 
was taken as an approximation because MoMo does not 
have  WTT  emissions  for  newly  manufactured  vehicles. 
The WTW  approach  reflects  the  shift  of  emissions  from 
one scope to another, for example due to electrification. 
The  WTW  emissions  pathways  are  then  divided  by  the 
activity in vkm for new vehicles to build the intensity path-
ways. 

As  companies  make  assumptions  for  the  type  of  fuels 
plugged into the fuel tanks, original equipment manufac-
turers (OEMs) can also make assumptions of the average 
grid electricity factors for their sales across markets.  

3.3.2  Target-setting approaches & results interpretation

Manufacturers of LDVs and HDVs can use the SDA Trans-
port  tool  directly  for  scope  3  GHG  target-setting  (conver-
gence approach). 

BOX 5. Recommendations for road vehicle  
manufacturers

The carbon intensity of new vehicles (per transport category) 
will converge towards the carbon intensity pathway for new 
vehicles 18. These pathway differ from those applied to com-
panies that own or control vehicles, since they exclude the 
stock vehicles emissions.

The unit used in the convergence formula is gCO2e/vkm19. 
Manufacturers are encouraged to use the occupancy rates 
factors and load factors of MoMo (Annex II) to covert target 
year results from vkm to pkm or tkm. 

Vehicle  manufacturers  producing  different  vehicle  types 
must  aggregate  their  intensity  figures  to  set  a  company-
wide  science-based  target  for  their  scope  3  emissions. 
Example: 

Company A commits to reduce the emissions in-
tensity (gCO2e/vkm) of its product portfolio X% by 
2030 from a 2015 base-year. 

The  SDA  Transport  tool  also  provides  the  possibility  for 
road  vehicle  manufacturers  to  obtain  results  in  liters  of 
gasoline equivalent per 100 kilometers (lge/100 km). This 
metric  purely  reflects  the  fuel  economy  of  new vehicles 
(TTW portion). The lge numerator already reflects the ef-
fect of power train electrification. 

18 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

1.  Check the validity of your targets. To ensure 
consistent tracking of performance over 
time, the target should be recalculated 
to reflect significant changes that would 
compromise its relevance and consistency. 
For example, changes in growth projections, 
significant changes in the mix of products, 
company structure (e.g. mergers, divest-
ments), and other relevant assumptions 
used in the target modeling exercise. 

2.  Engage with regulators to promote demand 
of more efficient low or zero carbon vehicle 
types.

3.  Explore new business models. Electrifica-
tion of road transport is required to meet 
the 2DS and B2DS goals. Therefore, the 
decarbonization of the power sector and 
the development of a smart grid systems 
(including vehicle-to-grid technologies) will 
require close collaboration among govern-
ments, users and solutions providers.

3.4  COMPANIES THAT MANUFACTURE ROAD VEHICLE PARTS

3.4.1  GHG emissions and activity

For auto part manufacturers, category 11 of scope 3 is the 
“Indirect  use-phase  of  sold  products”.  While  it  is  more 
common for vehicle manufacturers, in reality a vehicle is 
composed of a number of components / auto parts that 
contribute  to  the  consumption  of  energy  in  the  vehicle. 
Some components contribute more than others to the ul-
timate vehicle emissions, and the determination of the ex-
act percentage contribution can be complicated.

Product use emissions can be direct or indirect. Under the 
GHG Protocol, companies are required to report direct use 
phase emissions, and may also include indirect-use emis-
sions when these are expected to be significant. However, 
there is no guidance on significance thresholds. Therefore, 
indirect use-phase emissions of auto part manufacturers 
are of voluntary reporting. 

BOX 6. Michelin’s scope 3 emissions

According  to  Michelin’s  research,  the  tire’s  con-
tribution to fuel consumption is between 20 and 
25%  for  passenger  cars,  and  30-35%  for  trucks. 
A fraction of this is used to overcome the rolling 
resistance,  the  rest  of  the  energy  is  consumed 
within the dynamic elements of a vehicle.  

Michelin reports on these emissions every year 
as a key part of their climate strategy. The com-
pany  is  working  with  its  researchers  to  further 
push  the  boundaries  of  rolling  resistance  of  its 
tires to reduce energy consumption and there-
fore emissions. 

For  auto  part  manufacturers  reporting  these  emissions, 
the recommendation is to use WTW emissions factors, as 
vehicle manufacturers. 

These improvements must be balanced by regu-
latory  limits,  since  there  is  a  trade-off  between 
improving rolling resistance and safety.

There are different levers of decarbonization that can re-
duce the energy needs in a vehicle, for example: improved 
aerodynamics,  reduced  rolling  resistance,  weight  reduc-
tions, internal combustion (ICE) efficiency gains, enhanced 
power train efficiency, etc. Together with vehicle manufac-
turers,  auto  part  manufacturers  can  work  towards  influ-
encing one or more of these levers to different degrees.

Michelin and WWF are currently exploring a tar-
get-setting  approach  based  on  the  assumption 
of current and long-term fuel consumption con-
tribution from tires across vehicles with different 
powertrains.

3.4.2  Target-setting approaches & results interpretation

During the development of the SDA Transport tool, the pos-
sibility  of  building  a  science-based  pathway  for  auto  part 
manufacturers was considered. Such an exercise would re-
quire a more in-depth analysis and understanding of the as-
sumptions in MoMo. 

The aggregation level in MoMo does not currently allow the 
development  of  specific  pathways  for  different  auto  part 
manufactures. An approach for tire manufacturers is being 
explored. The pathway would reflect the contribution of tires 
to the fuel consumption of the vehicle (different per power 
train)  and  the  need  to  decarbonize  the  transport  sector  in 
line with a well-below 2°C world. 

In  the  absence  of  2°C/Well-below  2°C  pathways  for  auto 
part  manufacturers,  companies  can  use  other  approaches 
for indirect use-phase emissions target-setting:

• 

• 

Absolute emission reduction targets that are  
consistent with the level of decarbonization  
required to keep global temperature increase 
below 2°C compared to pre-industrial  
temperatures.

Ambitious performance-based targets that  
contribute to the reduction of energy needs  
in a vehicle.

18  This method is not applicable to companies with a product portfolio that already yields a zero emissions footprint in the TTW part (e.g. EV manufacturers), 

although they are welcome to apply to and participate in the SBTi. 

19   The assumed average lifetime of road vehicles in MoMo  varies by vehicle type, region, and over time. The assumed average global kilometers per year 

can be found in Annex III,

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 19

4

METHODOLOGICAL CHOICES

4.1  SELECTION OF DECARBONIZATION SCENARIOS 

FROM THE INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY

The International Energy Agency low carbon scenarios are 
created using the ETP-TIMES model (OECD/IEA, 2017). It is 
used to determine the least-cost technology mix needed 
to meet the final demand for three sectors: industry, trans-
port, and buildings. 

The  ETP-TIMES  model  starts  from  primary  energy  sup-
ply and conversion to final energy demand up to 2060. It 
models the current situation in the conversion sectors (e.g. 
existing capacity stock, operating costs, and conversion ef-
ficiencies) and then integrates the technical and economic 
characteristics  of  existing  technologies  that  can  be  add-
ed to the energy system. In this way it can determine the 
least-cost  technology  mix  needed  to  meet  the  final  de-
mand. This final demand is determined by the sub-models 
of  the  specific  end-use  sectors.  The  transport  sector  is 
modeled with Mobility Model (MoMo).

pathways; and electricity (with emissions according to the 
average national generation mix as modelled by the ETP-
TIMES model in the relevant scenario).
MoMo estimates on energy use are based on stocks, uti-
lization  (travel  per  vehicle),  and  vehicle  energy  intensity  
(energy use per vehicle, i.e. fuel economy). Emissions are 
calculated via fuel emission factors for CO2 and pollutants 
on a vehicle and well-to-wheel basis for all modes. The re-
sults of the modeling exercise are validated and calibrated 
against the IEA’s energy balances. 

Cost  evolution  of  technology,  policy  frameworks  and  oil 
prices are the primary drivers of technology penetration in 
transport. In each scenario, the model aggregates the to-
tal costs across modes and regions of vehicle production,  
operations and maintanence, fuel  outlays, and infrastruc-
ture investments.

MoMo is a simulation model of detailed transport activity 
projections, vehicle activity, energy demand, and well-to-
wheel greenhouse gas (GHG) and pollutant emissions ac-
cording to user-defined policy scenarios to 2060.  

It integrates 27 countries and regions, historical data from 
1975 to 2015 (or 1990 to 2015 for certain countries). It mod-
els future trends over five-year steps to create scenarios 
to  the year  2060, which  are  integrated  into  the  broader 
ETP  framework  using  a  combination  of  “what  if”  analy-
sis expert judgment and backcasting. It has national and 
regional  resolution  split  for  both  urban  and      non-urban 
geographies into parameters including vehicle stock, ac-
tivity, energy use and emissions; passenger and transport 
services by major motorized transport modes (including 
a wide range of power train technologies), as well as fuel 
supply options: gasoline and diesel, biofuels (ethanol and 
biodiesel via various production pathways) and synthetic 
alternatives to liquid fuels (coal-to-liquid and gas-to-liq-
uid); gaseous fuels, including natural gas (CNG and lique-
fied petroleum gas) and hydrogen via various production 

To learn about MoMo:  
https://www.iea.org/etp/etpmodel/transport/

To learn about the major assumptions in the IEA’s mod-
eling (GDP, oil prices and population growth):  
https://www.iea.org/etp/etpmodel/assumptions/

To learn more about the penetration of road  
vehicle technologies:  
https://www.iea.org/topics/transport/

MoMo  adopts  the  “avoid,  shift  and  improve”  paradigm 
through  the  assumptions  made  on  technologies  and 
policies.    Technological  drivers  in  the  model  are  mainly               
assumptions on the cost evolution of the technology and 
the policy framework. Elasticities and case studies on pol-
icy impacts are used to model the behavioural response 
to  pricing,  regulatory,  and  other  policies  (such  as  invest-
ment  in  compact  cities  or  public  transit  infrastructure  or 
fare subsidies). These factors together with oil prices can 
significantly alter technology penetration patterns. 

20 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

 
The  ETP  2017  describes  the  potential  role  and  impact  of 
the  “autonomous  and  connected vehicles,  electrification, 
and  sharing”  (ACES),  yet  it  recognizes  that  to  date,  the 
magnitude  of  their  effects  and  the  direction  of  mobility 
patterns, energy use and emissions it still uncertain and it 
can only be speculated on.
The IEA Mobility Model (MoMo) was selected as the mod-
eling scenario for the following reasons:

• 

• 

Compatibility with IEA ETP sectoral budgets 
(basis for SDA tool): The Sector Decarbonization 
Approach uses the sector carbon budgets and 
activity projections from the IEA’s annual publica-
tion: Energy Technology Perspectives (ETP) Report 
(OECD/IEA, 2017). IEA’s modeling includes energy, 
industry, buildings and transport. The transport part 
is derived from the Mobility Model exercise. Table 3 
shows the carbon budget of the 2DS and B2DS in 
the ETP report. 

Availability of both B2DS and 2DS scenarios: Ac-
cording to the Paris Agreement global emissions 
need to be reduced at a level to hold the increase 
in the global average temperature to well below 
2°C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts 
to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above 
pre-industrial levels, recognizing that this would 
significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate 

Table 3. CO2 budget assumptions in the 2DS and BD2DS (GtCO2).

change. Therefore, the SBTi encourages companies 
to set targets in line with these temperature thresh-
olds. At the time of this project, the IEA’s work was 
the closest readily available model that introduced 
the “well below 2°C” pathway. The IEA’s B2DS sce-
nario when projected to 2100 is expected to lead to 
1.75°C temperature outcome with a 50% chance. 

• 

• 

Its mitigation levers are transparent: Although  
MoMo is only available through a License Agree-
ment, its assumptions, including mitigation levers, 
can be tracked through the publicly available 
spreadsheets and the ETP Report. As for any other 
model, it is a perfectible model that it is updated 
every year through peer-review by experts in the 
field and the MoMo partners. 

It covers both passenger and freight transport: 
The main objective of the SDA tool refinement for 
the transport sector was to be as comprehensive 
as possible. The refinement and inclusion of pas-
senger and freight transport pathways will not only 
facilitate the modeling of SBTs for vehicle owners, 
but also for other companies highly dependent on 
logistics services and for road vehicle manufactur-
ers. MoMo’s level of disaggregation is suitable to 
derive subsector pathways per transport mode. 

SCENARIO

2DS

B2DS

Total CO2 budget
(2015-2100)

LULUCF  
(2015-2100)

Energy sector CO2 
budget (2015 -2100)

Energy sector CO2 
budget (2015-2060)

1,140

720

-30

-30

1,170*

750

1,000*

750

* Includes emissions from industrial processes and fuel combustion. Source: IEA- ETP, 2017

BOX 7. The IEA’s 2DS and B2DS modeling in a nutshell

Excerpt  from  the  IEA’s  Energy  Technologies  Perspec-
tives Report 2017: 

• 

• 

The final energy demand in the B2DS is around 45 
EJ (10%) lower than the 2DS in 2060 and margin-
ally lower (4%) than 2014 levels.
Final energy demand in the B2DS reflects the 
significant role of electrification of end-use sec-
tors (particularly ground transport and buildings) in 
order to achieve this ambitious pathway. 

•  Oil experiences the greatest decline in its share, 
from almost 40% in 2014 to 16%, an absolute 
decline of 96 EJ, reflecting the shift away from 
petrol- and diesel-fueled vehicles.
In the B2DS, WTW emissions from transport have 
to decrease by 89% by 2060 compared to 2015 
emissions, while in the 2DS 54% over the same 
time frame. All transport modes must contribute to 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

decarbonization, not only through reducing emis-
sions intensity, but also absolute emissions.
The transport sector provides over 50 GtCO2 of ad-
ditional emissions reductions compared with the 
2DS, primarily through energy efficiency (57%), fuel 
switching (28%) and renewables (15%).
The role of biofuels in transport is lower in the 
B2DS than in the 2DS in 2060 – 24 EJ compared 
with 30 EJ – due in part to a 20% overall reduc-
tion in transport energy demand between the two 
scenarios.
A 1.75°C pathway would require the emissions 
intensity of power generation to fall from around 
520 gCO2/kWh today to become carbon negative, 
at -10 gCO2/kWh, in 2060.
Scenario estimates of total expenditure on vehi-
cles, infrastructure and fuels show that the cumu-
lative costs of transport in the RTS are about USD 
130 trillion (2015 USD PPP) higher than those of the 
2DS, and USD 110 trillion higher than in the B2DS.

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 21

4.2  SECTORAL DECARBONIZATION APPROACH (SDA)

The Sectoral Decarbonization Approach (SDA) tool was de-
veloped by the SBTi partners with technical support from 
Ecofys. The SDA tool allocates the energy-related carbon 
budget  to  different  sectors. The  allocation  takes  into  ac-
count inherent differences among sectors, such as mitiga-
tion potential and how fast each sector can grow relative to 
economic and population growth.

Within  each  sector,  companies  can  derive  their  science-
based  targets  based  on  their  relative  contribution  to  the 
total  sector  activity  and  their  carbon  intensity  relative  to 
the sector’s intensity in the base year. Therefore, the rate 
of reduction varies per company depending on how close 
their intensity is at present compared to the sector. Using 
the detailed sector scenarios from the IEA’s 2DS and B2DS 
models, it is possible to estimate the 2DS or B2DS compat-
ible carbon intensity for each sector scenario by dividing 
the total direct emissions of the sector in any given year by 
the total activity of the sector in the same year. This yields 
a sector intensity pathway.

allocation method. The assumption is that the emissions in-
tensity of each company in the same sector will converge 
with the sector emissions intensity by 2050. 

A company’s intensity pathway—given by the SDA tool—
multiplied  by  their  projected  activity  yield  a  company’s 
carbon budget in absolute terms for the target period. In 
principle, the sum of these budgets should be contained 
within  the  sector  projected  budget  given  by  the  IEA  in 
each of the above-mentioned scenarios. 

The pathways built in the SDA Transport tool are based on 
the  MoMo’s  figures  for  stock  vehicles.  Stock  vehicles  are 
those  already  in  circulation  plus  the  new  additions  each 
year.  Emissions  are  Well-to-Wheel  (WTW)  reflecting  not 
only the direct use emissions from fuel combustion (TTW: 
Tank-to-Wheel) but also upstream emissions related to fuel 
production and distribution (WTT: Well-to-Tank), as well as 
electricity generation for electric vehicles. 

For homogeneous sectors physical activity indicators - for 
example,  tons  of  cement,  passenger-kilometers  (pkm), 
kilowatt-hours (KWh) – convergence is used as the carbon 

The WTW emissions pathways are then divided by the cor-
responding activity (pkm, tkm) to build the intensity pathways. 
The WTW approach reflects the shift of emissions from one 
scope to another, for example due to electrification. 

4.2.1  Convergence

In designing the SDA method for all sectors, it was antici-
pated that, in the long run, large companies will have equal 
opportunities  to  abate  the  GHG  emissions  of  their  activi-
ties. To reduce GHG emissions, three elements are impor-
tant to consider: (1) the energy efficiency of the process; (2) 
the carbon intensity of the energy used; and, (3) the emis-

sions related to the process and its design. Although there 
are  still  differences  in  energy  efficiency  among world  re-
gions, these differences will tend to disappear in the long 
term because of the convergence of the energy efficien-
cy  technologies,  as  shown  by  historic  trends  (WRI,  CDP, 
WWF, 2015).

4.2.2  Market share parameter

One of the parameters used in the convergence approach 
for homogeneous sectors is the company’s expected ac-
tivity growth. This input parameter is used in the SDA tool 
to estimate the company’s market share compared to the 
sector’s  total  activity  in  any  given  year  (selected  target 
year). 

tained as if the market share remained constant through-
out  the  target  period.  This  safeguard  is  deemed  robust 
and justifiable since it preserves the carbon budget integ-
rity. Since the tool came after the SDA technical paper was 
published  in  2014,  this  safeguard  is  not  captured  in  the 
notes of the document. 

After  beta-testing  the  first  SDA  Excel  tool,  stakeholders 
raised  the  potential  threat  of  over  allocating  the  carbon 
budget when companies underestimate their growth. To 
prevent this situation, the SBT team introduced a cap to 
the  market  share  parameter,  only  in  cases  in  which  the 
company  projects  to  decrease  their  market  share  (any 
market  parameter  above  1.00  is  brought  down  to  1.00). 
In  all  other  cases,  the  decarbonization  pathway  is  main-

According to Krabbe, et. al. (2015): “The intensity pathways 
of the fast-growing companies are steepened to account 
for their increase in market share. If this is not accounted 
for, the sector average intensity will increase owing to the 
growth, resulting in an exceedance of the sector’s carbon 
budget. The opposite happens to the intensity pathways 
of  the  companies  that  show  a  decreasing  market  share. 
Although  this  might  seem  unrealistic  or  unfair,  it  makes 

22 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

sense from a business perspective, because when a com-
pany’s market share is decreasing, it will probably invest 
less in new, more efficient technologies, and vice versa.”

The  convergence  formula,  including  the  market  share 
parameter, comply with the following condition: for every 
year the sum of all individual company emissions targets 
does not exceed the sector’s total carbon budget. 

4.2.3  Sector developments

Some of the benefits of setting targets using a sector-spe-
cific method are the possibility of setting targets based on 
a common intensity unit used by peers (transparency), and 
the possibility to capture the mitigation opportunities and 
associated costs available for the sector (tailored). 

However, acknowledging that some sectors are still highly 
aggregated, the Science Based Targets Initiative is work-
ing  on  other  sector  developments,  and  invites  interested 
stakeholders  to  contribute  to  the  development  of  new 
sector pathways in line with the Paris Agreement goals.

4.3  Carbon accounting methodologies

Science-based targets (SBTs) are based on the emissions calculated and reported by the company. As such, a target 
is only as good as the emissions data that feeds the model. Companies adopting SBTs will need to calculate emissions 
intensity and absolute emissions values for each transport mode. 

To promote comparability and transparency of emissions calculations, three methodologies are encouraged:

For general GHG reporting guidance and passenger transport:  
Greenhouse Gas Protocol

Developed by the World Resources Institute and the World Business Council for Sus-
tainable Development, the Greenhouse Gas Protocol is considered baseline method-
ology  for  carbon  accounting  and  reporting,  and  is widely  used  by  industry. The  SBT 
has adopted the Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard for scope 1 emissions 
and the Corporate Value Chain Accounting and Reporting Standard for scope 3 (WRI & 
WBCSD, 2004 and WRI & WBCSD, 2011, respectively).

The  methodology  provides  a  “basic  training”  on  carbon  accounting  that  is  useful  for 
understanding  the  terminologies,  creating  a  plan  for  setting  up  accounting  systems, 
and provides default factors where data are unknown. The GHG Protocol is the base 
methodology for CDP reporting.

For products GHG reporting guidance:  
Greenhouse Gas Protocol

Developed  by  the  World  Resources  Institute  and  the  World  Business  Coun-
cil  for  Sustainable  Development,  the  GHG  Protocol  Product  Life  Cycle  Accounting 
and  Reporting  Standard  (referred  to  as  the  Product  Standard)  provides  require-
ments  and  guidance  for  companies  and  other  organizations  to  quantify  and  pub-
licly  report  an  inventory  of  GHG  emissions  and  removals  associated  with  a  spe-
cific  product.  The  primary  goal  of  this  standard  is  to  provide  a  general  framework 
for  companies  to  make  informed  choices  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions 
from  the  products  (goods  or  services)  they  design,  manufacture,  sell,  purchase, 
or  use.  The  GHG  Protocol  Scope  3  Standard  and  GHG  Protocol  Product  Stan-
dard  both  take  a  value  chain  or  life  cycle  approach  to  GHG  accounting  and  were  
developed simultaneously.

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 23

For freight transport specific guidance:  
Global Logistics Emissions Council Framework

Developed  by  Smart  Freight  Centre,  the  Global  Logistics  Emissions  Council  (GLEC) 
Framework (Smart Freight Centre, 2015) is built in accordance with the GHG Protocol 
and includes guidance specific to the logistics sector and its customers.  It  covers  all 
regions, modes of transport and scopes, and includes a set of default factors specific 
to freight transport. The GLEC Framework will be the methodology for freight transport, 
alongside the GHG Protocol, in the new 2018 CDP transport questionnaire.

4.4  Well to Wheel emissions boundary

The boundary for GHG inventories and reductions targets 
should be as wide and accurate as possible.  Emissions not 
covered under a target cannot be managed / reduced.  

scenario-specific  estimated  average  grid  carbon  inten-
sity) (OECD/ IEA, 2017). TTW emissions cover the energy 
used once transformed (e.g. combustion of the fuel during  
vehicle use). Together these form the WTW emissions. 

The emissions from the use of a vehicle consists of WTT 
and TTW emissions. WTT emissions occur upstream in the 
value chain of the fuel production; these are based on at-
tributional life-cycle assessment studies of fossil-derived 
fuels  (e.g.  gasoline,  diesel,  compressed  and  liquefied 
natural  gas),  biofuels  and  electricity  (based  on  time  -and 

The SBTi requires companies to cover WTW emissions for 
GHG  target-setting,  as  more  opportunities  for  mitigation 
are captured in a WTW basis, as well as the shift of emis-
sions between TTW and WTT due to the switch in power 
train technologies. 

24 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

5

ANNEX

Annex I. Default factors for fuel consumption and emissions

The Smart Freight Centre has produced an excellent compendium of consumption factors per tonne-kilometer for 
logistics in the GLEC Framework: Module 1. Default consumption factors and sources.

Also, Smart Freight Centre commissioned VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland to review the sources of fuel 
emissions factors used in standards, databases and methodologies, in the transport / logistics sector: Module 2: Fuel-
based emissions factors.

Many of the sources listed by the SFC have also information on passenger transport: 

• 

http://www.smartfreightcentre.org/glec/what-is-glec

The GHG Protocol also provides a life-cycle data bases and tools across sectors. 

• 
• 

http://www.ghgprotocol.org/life-cycle-databases
http://www.ghgprotocol.org/calculation-tools

The MoMo 2017 uses the WTT emissions factors from the JRC Concawe 2011 study. 

• 

http://iet.jrc.ec.europa.eu/about-jec/downloads

Global electricity intensity in  MoMo 2017:

Intensity - Electricity generation (kgCO2/MWh), World

2DS

B2DS

2014

572.02

572.02

2025

360.85

330.18

2030

245.22

228.79

2035

150.87

140.69

2040

97.38

71.91

2045

55.77

20.35

2050

36.50

-8.02

Annex II. Average occupancy rates and load factors used in MoMo, 2017

Freight load (tonne per vkm), World, 2DS

Freight load (tonne per vkm), World, B2DS

2015

2020

2025

2030

2015

2020

2025

2030

2-3 Wheelers

Light vehicles

Large road

0.24

0.68

12.30

0.24

0.71

13.10

0.23

0.73

13.73

0.22

0.76

14.09

2-3 Wheelers

Light vehicles

Large road

0.24

0.68

12.30

0.24

0.71

13.17

0.23

0.75

13.97

0.22

0.79

14.55

Rail

1,613.02

1,603.25

1,594.61

1,588.46

Rail

1,613.02

1,603.25

1,594.61

1,588.46

Shipping

20,496.07

21,051.66 21,359.83

21,769.62

Shipping

20,496.07

21,007.56 21,295.55 21,673.05

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 25

Passenger load (people per vkm), World, 2DS

Passenger load (people per vkm), World, B2DS

2015

2020

2025

2030

2015

2020

2025

2030

2-3 Wheelers

Light vehicles

Large road

1.17

1.59

15.11

1.17

1.62

15.46

1.17

1.62

15.71

1.17

1.60

15.87

2-3 Wheelers

Light vehicles

Large road

1.17

1.59

15.11

1.17

1.62

1.17

1.62

1.17

1.60

15.42

15.61

15.62

Rail

349.11

353.84

353.32

340.16

Rail

349.11

353.04

350.49

333.60

Annex III. Assumed average km per year for road vehicles 

From  MoMo 2017:

Passenger mileage  
(thousand km/year per vehicle), World, 2DS

Passenger mileage  
(thousand km/year per vehicle), World, B2DS

2015

2020

2025

2030

2015

2020

2025

2030

2-3 Wheelers

Light vehicles

Large road

7.18

13.56

31.10

7.26

13.10

30.14

7.23

12.77

29.74

7.22

12.55

29.42

2-3 Wheelers

Light vehicles

Large road

7.18

13.56

31.10

7.25

13.03

30.16

7.23

12.64

29.86

7.17

12.11

29.81

Freight mileage  
(thousand km/year per vehicle), World, 2DS

Freight mileage  
(thousand km/year per vehicle), World, B2DS

2015

2020

2025

2030

2015

2020

2025

2030

2-3 Wheelers

Light vehicles

Large road

6.56

16.06

27.18

6.65

15.55

26.70

6.92

15.36

26.66

7.23

15.56

26.96

2-3 Wheelers

Light vehicles

Large road

6.56

16.06

27.18

6.66

15.49

26.46

6.93

15.25

26.42

7.29

15.38

26.51

26 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

GLOSSARY

Carbon  dioxide  emission  budget  (or  carbon  budget): 
For a given temperature rise limit, for example a  2°C 
long-term  limit,  the  corresponding  carbon  budget 
reflects  the  total  amount  of  carbon  emissions  that 
can be emitted for temperatures to stay below that 
limit. Stated differently, a carbon budget is the area 
under a carbon dioxide (CO2) emission trajectory that 
satisfies  assumptions  about  limits  on  cumulative 
emissions estimated to avoid a certain level of global 
mean surface temperature rise.

Carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e): A way to place emis-
sions of various radiative forcing agents on a com-
mon  footing  by  accounting  for  their  effect  on  cli-
mate.  It  describes,  for  a  given  mixture  and  amount 
of greenhouse gases, the amount of CO2 that would 
have  the  same  global  warming  ability,  when  mea-
sured over a specified time period.

Sectoral  Decarbonization  Approach  (SDA):  The  SDA 
is  differentiated  from  other  existing  science-based 
target  methods  by virtue  of  its  subsector-level  ap-
proach  and  global  least-cost  mitigation  perspec-
tive, in line with the carbon budget related to a given 
temperature  goal.  Currently,  the  SDA  tool  uses  the 
sector  decarbonization  trajectories  of  the  Interna-
tional Energy Agency (IEA).

Convergence  approach  used  in  the  Sectoral  Decar-
bonization  Approach  (SDA):  The  convergence 
approach  for  homogeneous  sectors  in  the  SDA  is 
based on the assumption that the carbon intensity of 
a company convergences towards the carbon inten-
sity of the sector at a rate that ensures not exceed-
ing the sectoral carbon budget. The rate of conver-
gence of a company is a function of the initial carbon 
intensity of the company, the carbon intensity of the 
sector,  and  the  growth  of  the  company  relative  to 
the growth of the sector. 

Contraction approach used in the Sectoral Decarbon-
ization Approach  (SDA): The  contraction  approach 
assigns to companies the same percentage of abso-
lute emission reductions as is required for the sector 
selected within a given time period.

Scenario:  A  description  of  how  the  future  may  unfold 
based  on  ‘if-then’  propositions.  Scenarios  typically 
include  an  initial  socio-economic  situation  and  a 
description  of  the  key  driving  forces  and  future 
changes in emissions, temperature or other climate 
change-related variables.

Integrated  assessment  models:  Models  that  seek  to 
combine  knowledge  from  multiple  disciplines  in 
the form of equations and/or algorithms in order to 
explore complex environmental problems. As such, 
they describe the full chain of climate change, from 
production of greenhouse gases to atmospheric re-
sponses. This necessarily includes relevant links and 
feedbacks between socio-economic and biophysi-
cal processes.

International Energy Agency (IEA), 2°C scenario (2DS): 
The  2°C  Scenario  (2DS)  lays  out  an  energy  system 
pathway  and  a  CO2  emissions  trajectory  consistent 
with  at  least  a  50%  chance  of  limiting  the  average 
global temperature increase to 2°C by 2100. Annual 
energy-related  CO2  emissions  are  reduced  by  70% 
from today’s levels by 2060, with cumulative emis-
sions of around 1,170 gigatonnes of CO2 (GtCO2) be-
tween  2015  and  2100  (including  industrial  process 
emissions). To stay within this range, CO2 emissions 
from fuel combustion and industrial processes must 
continue their decline after 2060, and carbon neutral-
ity in the energy system must be reached before 2100.  

In transport, this reflects clear policy choices favour-
ing  less  energy  intensive  modes,  the  rapid  uptake 
of  all  cost-effective  energy  efficiency  opportunities 
and the transition towards a much higher reliance on 
low-carbon energy carriers by 2060.

International Energy Agency (IEA), Beyond 2°C scenario 
(B2DS):  The  Beyond  2°C  Scenario  (B2DS)  explores 
how far deployment of technologies that are already 
available or in the innovation pipeline could take us 
beyond the 2DS. Technology improvements and de-
ployment are pushed to their maximum practicable 
limits across the energy system in order to achieve 
net-zero emissions by 2060 and to stay net zero or 
below thereafter, without requiring unforeseen tech-
nology  breakthroughs  or  limiting  economic  growth.  

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 27

 
This  “technology  push”  approach  results  in  cumu-
lative  emissions  from  the  energy  sector  of  around 
750  GtCO2  between  2015  and  2100,  which  is  con-
sistent  with  a  50%  chance  of  limiting  average  fu-
ture temperature increases to 1.75°C. Energy sector 
emissions  reach  net  zero  around  2060,  supported 
by  significant  negative  emissions  through  deploy-
ment of bioenergy with carbon capture and storage 
(CCS).  The  B2DS  falls  within  the  Paris  Agreement 
range  of  ambition,  but  does  not  purport  to  define 
a  specific  temperature  target  for  “well  below  2°C”. 
In  transport,  this  requires  even  greater  reliance  on 
the most efficient modes, a very rapid deployment of 
zero-carbon vehicle technologies and energy carri-
ers to shift away from fossil fuels, and needs to be 
accompanied  by  effective  near-term  accelerated 
and ambitious policy changes.

IEA’s	 definition	 of	 Thank-to-wheel	 emissions	 (TTW): 
Tank-to-wheel emissions cover all the energy used 
once transformed, this is emissions occurring during 
the combustion of the fuels by vehicles.

IEA’s	 definition	 of	 Well-to-thank	 emissions	 (WTT): 
Well-to-tank  emissions  are  based  on  attributional 
life-cycle  assessment  studies  of  fossil-derived  fu-
els (e.g. gasoline, diesel, compressed and liquefied 
natural gas), biofuels and electricity (based on time- 
and  scenario-specific  estimated  average  grid  car-
bon  intensity).  Energy  use  and  emissions  resulting 
from pipeline transport are accounted for under “En-
ergy  industry  own  use”  in  the  International  Energy 
Agency own modeling. 

IEA’s	 definition	 of	 Well-to-wheel	 emissions	 (WTW): 
Together, TTW and WTT make up WTW GHG emis-
sions. This does not include emissions from vehicle 
or battery manufacturing, or those offset by material 
recycling, among others.

Passenger – kilometer: A  passenger-kilometer,  abbre-
viated  as  pkm,  is  the  unit  of  measurement  repre-
senting the transport of one passenger by a defined 
mode  of  transport  (road,  rail,  air,  sea,  inland water-
ways etc.) over one kilometer.

Tonne  –  kilometer:  A  tonne-kilometer,  abbreviated  as 
tkm, is a unit of measure of freight transport which 
represents the transport of one tonne of goods (in-
cluding  packaging  and  tare  weights  of  intermodal 
transport units) by a given transport mode (road, rail, 
air,  sea,  inland waterways,  pipeline  etc.)  over  a  dis-
tance of one kilometer.

SCOPES DEFINITIONS IN THE GHG PROTOCOL:

Scope  1  emissions:  Emissions  derived  from  the  com-
bustion  of  fossil  fuels  in  the  vehicle;  generally  de-
rived from invoices (e.g. liters of gasoline purchased). 

Scope  2  emissions:  Emissions  derived  from  the  com-
bustion  of  fossil  fuels  to  produce  electricity  that  is 
consumed in the companies’ vehicles. The GHG Pro-
tocol  Scope  2  Protocol  allow  companies  to  report 
these emissions in two ways.

Location-based  method  for  scope  2  accounting:  A 
method  to  quantify  scope  2  GHG  emissions  based 
on  average  energy  generation  emission  factors  for 
defined locations, including local, subnational, or na-
tional boundaries.

Market-based  method  for  scope  2  accounting:  A 
method  to  quantify  scope  2  GHG  emissions  based 
on  GHG  emissions  emitted  by  the  generators  from 
which the reporter contractually purchases electric-
ity  bundled  with  instruments,  or  unbundled  instru-
ments on their own.

Scope  3  Category  3  “Fuel  and  energy  related  activities”: 
This category includes emissions related to the pro-
duction  of  fuels  and  energy  purchased  and  con-
sumed  by  the  reporting  company  in  the  reporting 
year  that  are  not  included  in  scope  1  or  scope  2.  

This category includes emissions from four distinct 
activities:  1)  upstream  emissions  from  purchased 
fuels  (extraction,  production,  and  transportation 
of  fuels  consumed  by  the  reporting  company);  2) 
Upstream  emissions  of  purchased  electricity  (ex-
traction,  production,  and  transportation  of  fuels 
consumed  in  the  generation  of  electricity,  steam, 
heating,  and  cooling  that  is  consumed  by  the  re-
porting  company);  3)  T&D  losses  (generation  of 
electricity, steam, heating, and cooling that is con-
sumed (i.e., lost) in a T&D system – reported by end 
user);  and,  4)  Generation  of  purchased  electricity 
that  is  sold  to  end  users  (generation  of  electricity, 
steam,  heating,  and  cooling  that  is  purchased  by 
the reporting company and sold to end users – re-
ported by utility company or energy retailer). 

Scope 3 Category 6 “Business travel”: This category in-
cludes emissions from the transportation of employ-
ees for business-related activities in vehicles owned 
or  operated  by  third  parties,  such  as  aircraft,  trains, 
buses, and passenger cars.

28 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

 
Scope  3  Category  7  “Employee  commuting”:  This  cat-
egory  includes  emissions  from  the  transportation  of 
employees between their homes and their worksites.

Scope  3  Category  4  “Upstream  transportation  and 
distribution”:  This  category  includes  emissions 
from the transportation and distribution of products 
(excluding fuel and energy products) purchased or 
acquired  by  the  reporting  company  in  the  report-
ing year in vehicles and facilities not owned or op-
erated by the reporting company, as well as other  
transportation and distribution services purchased 
by the reporting company in the reporting year (in-
cluding both inbound and outbound logistics).

by the reporting company in the reporting year be-
tween the reporting company’s operations and the 
end consumer (if not paid for by the reporting com-
pany),  in  vehicles  and  facilities  not  owned  or  con-
trolled by the reporting company.

Bioenergy:  Energy  derived  from  any  form  of  biomass 
such as recently living organisms or their metabolic 
by-products.

Bioenergy  and  Carbon  Dioxide  Capture  and  Storage 
(BECCS): The application of Carbon Dioxide Capture 
and Storage (CCS) technology to bioenergy conver-
sion processes.

Scope 3 Category 9 “Downstream transportation and 
distribution”:  This  category 
includes  emissions 
from transportation and distribution of products sold 

Uncertainty: A cognitive state of incomplete knowledge 
that can result from a lack of information or from dis-
agreement about what is known or even knowable.

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 29

Resources

WRI & WBCSD, 2004, Greenhouse Gas Protocol: A Cor-
porate  Accounting  and  Reporting  Standard  (Re-
vised  Edition):  http://www.ghgprotocol.org/files/
ghgp/public/ghg-protocol-revised.pdf

WRI  &  WBCSD,  2011,  Greenhouse  Gas  Protocol  Cor-
porate  Value  Chain  (Scope  3)  Accounting  and 
Reporting  Standard:  http://www.ghgprotocol.org/
files/ghgp/public/Corporate-Value-Chain-Ac-
counting-Reporing-Standard_041613.pdf

WRI & WBCSD, 2011, Greenhouse Gas Protocol Product 
Life  Cycle  Accounting  and  Reporting  Standard: 
http://www.ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/
ghgp/standards/Product-Life-Cycle-Accounting-
Reporting-Standard_041613.pdf

Smart  Freight  Centre,  2016,  GLEC  Framework  for  Lo-
gistics  Emissions  Methodologies:  http://www.
smartfreightcentre.org/info/glec-framework-
download-form

WRI,  CDP,  WWF,  2015,  Science-based  Target-setting 
Manual (Draft Version): http://sciencebasedtargets.
org/2015/09/23/for-public-comment-science-
based-target-setting-manual/

References

ATAG (2018). Website accessed May 1st, 2018: https://

www.atag.org/our-activities/climate-change.html

Greenbiz  (2018).  Website  accessed  May  1st,  2018: 

https://www.greenbiz.com/article/shipping-
industry-has-quietly-gone-without-climate-
plan-until-now?utm_source=newsletter&utm_
medium=email&utm_term=newsletter-type-
greenbuzz-daily&utm_content=2018-04-15&utm_
campaign=newsletter-type-greenbuzz-daily-
110209&mkt_tok=eyJpIjoiTlRsaFpEZGxOamRoWlR-
jNSIsInQiOiJ1elo3bWpkYm5VbjUybXlMU2pVcktTZ3
pZRWFnTkRpd2JKRlY5cFF6Z2ViMSt4a09JbXROcjZ
EMTZ5cmVBaklhdU5VdEtkQU5FWFwvWTdKU3d-
4WjFocFZWenZNRmx0d242VWJvVnBKVVwvU1B-
0NmpSSE04eXRxa1pCemtHU2FTZHdiIn0%3D

30 | Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance

ICCT  (2014).  ‘Development  of  Test  Cycle  Conversion 
Factors  among  Worldwide  Light-duty  vehicles 
CO2 Emissions Standards’, ICCT White Paper, Sep-
tember  2014.  Accessible  at:  https://www.theicct.
org/sites/default/files/publications/ICCT_LDV-
test-cycle-conversion-factors_sept2014.pdf

IEA (2017). Mobility Model, August 2017 version, data-
base and simulation model, www.iea.org/etp/etp-
model/transport/

IEA (2017).  ‘The Future of Trucks,  Implications for en-
ergy and the environment’, IEA Insight Series 2017.

IPCC (2014). Working Group III - Fifth Assessment Re-
port.  Accessible  at:  http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccrep-
orts/tar/wg3/index.php?idp=311

Krabbe,  O,  Linthorst,  G,  Blok,  K,  Crijns-Graus,  W,  van 
Vuuren, DP, Hohne, Niklas, Faria, P, Aden, N & Car-
rillo-Pineda,  A  (2015).  ‘Aligning  corporate  green-
house-gas  emissions  targets with  climate  goals’, 
Nature Climate Change.

OECD/IEA  (2017).  ‘Energy  Technology  Perspectives 
Report 2017, Catalysing Energy Technology Trans-
formations’, International Energy Agency.

WRI,  CDP,  WWF  (2015).  ‘Sectoral  Decarbonization 
Approach  (SDA):  A  method  for  setting  corporate 
emissions  reduction  targets  in  line  with  climate 
science’, Science Based Targets initiative. 

Transport Science-Based Target-Setting Guidance | 31

http://sciencebasedtargets.org/transport-2/

Download our new transport-specifi c technical 
resources and explore science based 
target setting for your company today.

