Second Life of E-Truck 
Batteries for Sustainable 
Logistics 

August 2024 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second  Life  of  E-Truck  Batteries  for 
Sustainable Logistics 

August 2024 

© Smart Freight Centre, 2024 
Suggested citation: Smart Freight Centre & Cenex Nederland. Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable 
Logistics. 2024 
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in any form for educational or non-profit purposes without special permission 
from the copyright holder, provided acknowledgment of the source is made. Smart Freight Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of 
any publication that uses ' Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics.’ as a source.  No use of this publication may 
be made for resale or for any other commercial purpose whatsoever, without prior permission in writing from Smart Freight Centre. 

Disclaimer 
The views expressed in this publication are those of Smart Freight Centre and staff, consultants and management, and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Trustees of Smart Freight Centre. Smart Freight Centre does not guarantee the a ccuracy of 
the data included in this publication and does not accept responsibility for consequence of their use. 

Acknowledgements 
This report was written by Priyansh Doshi (Smart Freight Centre), Rishabh Ghotge (Cenex Nederland) and Tharsis Teoh (Smart Freight 
Centre).  

About Smart Freight Centre 
Smart Freight Centre is an international non-profit organization focused on reducing greenhouse gas emissions from freight 
transportation. Smart Freight Centre’s vision is an efficient and zero emission global logistics sector. Smart Freight Centre’s mission is 
to collaborate with the organization’s global partners to quantify impacts, identify solutions, and propagate logistics decarbonization 
strategies. Smart Freight Centre’s goal is to guide the global logistics industry in tracking and reducing the industry’s greenhouse gas 
emissions by one billion tonnes by 2030 and to reach zero emissions by 2050 or earlier, consistent with a 1.5°C future. 

About Cenex Nederland 
Cenex Nederland (Cenex NL) is an independent, not-for-profit Consultancy and Research Technology Organisation based in 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. They work with and for governments, industry, and academia on finding solutions in Zero Emissions 
Mobility, Energy Infrastructure and Circular Mobility. 

Contact 
Smart Freight Centre 
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

2 

            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Table of Contents 

Executive Summary ............................................................................................. 6 

Glossary ................................................................................................................ 8 

1 

Introduction .................................................................................................. 10 

Battery Technology in E-trucks ................................................................................... 10 

End of First Life of E-truck Batteries ........................................................................... 11 

2  Second Life Batteries: A Comprehensive Overview ............................... 13 

Market Overview .......................................................................................................... 14 

Benefits of a Second Life Battery Ecosystem ............................................................. 14 

Preparation and Assessment of End-of-Life EV Batteries for Second-Life Applications
 ..................................................................................................................................... 15 

Typical Applications of Second Life Batteries ............................................................. 16 

Second Life Battery Pilot Projects ............................................................................... 17 

Business Models Enabling .......................................................................................... 17 

EoFL Battery Use ........................................................................................................ 17 

3 

Impact on Road Freight Electrification ..................................................... 19 

Electricity Distribution Support at Charging Depots  ................................................... 19 

Replace Peaking Plants with SLBESS........................................................................ 19 

Benefits for Road Freight Electrification ...................................................................... 20 

4  Challenges and Regulatory Landscape  ................................................... 21 

Technical Challenges and Regulatory Gaps............................................................... 21 

Economic Challenges .................................................................................................. 22 

Regulatory Landscape ................................................................................................. 22 

5  Conclusions  ................................................................................................. 24 

Recommendations for Logistics Sector....................................................................... 24 

Bibliography........................................................................................................ 26 

3 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Table of Figures 

Figure 1: Comparison of different types of LiB chemistries used in e-trucks. .............................. 11 
Figure 2: Lifecycle of an e-truck battery. . .................................................................................... 12 
Figure 3: End of Life options for e-truck batteries. ....................................................................... 13 
Figure 4: Global LiB demand in GWh. ......................................................................................... 14 
Figure 5: Steps for battery reuse or repurposing. ........................................................................ 15 
Figure 6: Capital cost reduction (%) of distribution support system for charging, using SLBs. ... 19 
Figure 7: Comparison of net savings for various deployment levels of SLBs. ............................. 20 

4 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Table of Abbreviations 

BESS: Battery Energy Storage Systems 

BMS: Battery Management System 

E-Truck: Electric Truck 

EV: Electric Vehicle 

ELSA: Energy Local Storage Advanced System 

EoFL:  End of First Life  

EPR: Extended Producer Responsibility 

GHG: Greenhouse Gas 

GWh: Gigawatt hour 

HDV: Heavy-Duty Vehicles 

IRENA: International Renewable Energy Agency 

Kg: Kilogram 

kW: Kilowatt 

LFP: Lithium Iron Phosphate 

Li-S: Lithium Sulphur  

LiB: Lithium-ion Battery 

MWh: MegaWatt hour 

NCA: Nickel Cobalt Aluminium 

NMC: Nickel Manganese Cobalt 

OEM: Original Equipment Manufacturer 

RUL: Remaining Useful Life 

SLB: Second-Life Battery 

SLBESS: Second Life Battery Energy Storage System 

SoC: State of Charge 

SoH: State of Health 

TCO: Total Cost of Ownership 

TWh: Terawatt hour 

5 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Executive Summary 

The road freight sector in the European Union (EU) is witnessing a surge in the adoption of electric 
trucks (e-trucks), with sales of heavy-duty vehicles tripling. Batteries are crucial component for 
decarbonizing the transport sector, yet they constitute up to 40% of the total cost of ownership 
(TCO)  of  e-trucks  and  40%  of  the  greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  emissions  in  e-truck  production. 
Additionally, their manufacturing is associated with social sustainability issues. Moreover, these 
batteries  typically  reach  the  end  of  first  life  (EoFL)  in  e-truck  applications  when  their  capacity 
drops to 80%. For shippers and fleet owners aiming for a sustainable and economical transition 
in the freight transport sector, it is essential to maximize the potential of these batteries. After their 
first life in e-truck applications, these batteries still retain significant residual value, making their 
secondary use an increasingly important consideration. 

This  study  aims  to  provide  a  comprehensive  overview  of  the  reuse  and  repurposing  of  EoFL 
batteries of e-trucks. Section 1 delves into the landscape of battery technology in heavy duty e-
trucks, emphasizing on the lifecycle of e-truck batteries. Section 2 begins by defining the concepts 
of  battery  reuse  and  repurposing.  It  outlines  the  anticipated  market  demand  for  second  life 
batteries (SLB) and highlights the benefits of their secondary use. The section also explains how 
to  assess  and  prepare  these  batteries  for  their  second  life,  provides  real-world  examples  of 
second life applications, and showcases innovative business models that leverage the value of 
these batteries. Section 0 evaluates the impact of SLBs from e-truck on road freight electrification 
from both a practical and strategic perspective. Section 3 provides an overview of the technical 
and economic challenges of using batteries in second life  application. Additionally, the section 
presents a brief overview of the regulatory landscape for reuse and repurposing of EoFL batteries 
in EU. Finally, the study presents recommendations for policy makers and the logistic sector to 
facilitate the development of SLB ecosystem and capitalize on its benefits.  

The study provides the following high-level findings: 

Different  battery  chemistries  used  in  heavy-duty  e-trucks  have  varying  impacts  on 
usability  in  their  second  life.  LFP  (Lithium  Iron  Phosphate)  and  NMC  (Nickel  Manganese 
Cobalt) battery chemistries dominate the heavy-duty e-truck market in the EU. LFP batteries are 
more advantageous for second life applications due to their longer battery life. Additionally, LFP 
batteries have greater safety against thermal risks, making them safer for deployment in second 
life applications comparatively. 

Stationary storage and the mobility sector contribute to the majority of demand for lithium-
ion batteries, presenting an opportunity for shippers and fleet owners. Global demand for 
batteries  stands  at  4.3  terawatt  hours  (TWh)  for  mobility  applications  and  421  gigawatt  hours 
(GWh) for stationary applications. This presents a significant opportunity for shippers and fleet 
owners to reuse or repurpose electric vehicle (EV) batteries for second life applications in these 
markets. It is projected that by 2030, the supply of SLB for stationary applications could exceed 
200 GWh annually, representing a market valued at $30 billion globally. 

SLBs  offer  reduced  TCO  and  provide  a  stable,  sustainable  and  economical  charging 
infrastructure  for  shippers  and  fleet  owners.  SLBs  could  reduce  costs  for  end-users  by 
approximately 42% compared to new batteries. Therefore, EoFL e-truck batteries with significant 
residual capacity can be reused in less demanding mobile applications, drastically reducing TCO. 
Additionally,  repurposing  EoFL  e-truck  batteries  for  stationary  applications  at  charging  depots 
could reduce the capital cost of the charging system by approximately 25%. This would allow a 
large fleet of e-trucks to charge simultaneously at depots, minimizing the cost and time required 
for  network  reinforcements.  Furthermore,  SLBs  will  boost  the  deployed  storage  capacities  on 
energy  networks  beyond  what  is  achievable  with  new  batteries,  enhancing  renewable  energy 
deployment and reducing energy costs and emissions related to charging activities. 

6 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

The  feasibility  of  reusing  or  repurposing  EoFL  e-truck  batteries  depends  on  various 
technical  and  economic  factors.  Several  technical  challenges  need  to  be  considered  when 
choosing  second  life  options  for  EoFL  e-truck  batteries.  These  include  battery  heterogeneity, 
remaining  useful  life  (RUL)  prediction,  unique  safety  and  battery  management  system  (BMS) 
requirements for different second life applications, and the complexities of the disassembly and 
repurposing process. On the economic side, the benefits of reusing or repurposing EoFL e-truck 
batteries depend on the cost of repurposing, the cost of new batteries, and its lifespan in second 
life  applications.  The  cost  gap  between  repurposed  batteries  and  the  declining  cost  of  new 
batteries should be significantly large to justify the investment. 

There  is  a  lack  of  maturity  in  standards  for  battery  durability,  safety,  information 
accessibility,  and collection and refurbishment targets. Several regulatory  gaps  related to 
the battery second life ecosystem exist in the EU, hindering the feasibility of second life options 
for EoFL e-truck batteries. Information about the technical characteristics, state of  health, and 
operation history of batteries is currently not easily accessible until the implementation of the EU 
battery  passport  in  2027.  To  support  the  economic  feasibility  of  battery  reuse,  it  is  crucial  to 
standardize  state-of-health  (SoH)  metrics  to  inform  decisions  on  second  life  applications. 
Moreover, mandatory battery durability requirements are significant to incentivize the production 
of long-lasting batteries and support second life usage. Defining safety standards for reuse and 
repurposing  is  crucial  to  reducing  the  associated  risks.  Lastly,  defining  collection  and 
refurbishment targets will prevent  unwarranted  disposal  and ensure batteries are used to their 
maximum potential. 

The study further provides recommendations to enable shippers and fleet owners to maximize 
the potential of these EoFL e-truck batteries: 

Mandatory Battery Passport in Procurement Criteria: When procuring e-trucks, it is essential 
to ensure that the e-truck batteries come with a digital battery passport, making this a mandatory 
procurement requirement. Although the EU battery regulations mandate digital battery passports 
only from 2027, making this a mandatory requirement now will help shippers and fleet owners 
ease the repurposing process later, making it safe and cost-effective to deploy these batteries for 
the right second life application. 

Collaboration  with  Battery  Reuse  or  Repurposing  Companies  and  Knowledge  Partners: 
Shippers and fleet owners should actively collaborate with reputable battery reuse or repurposing 
companies to gain a thorough understanding of their specific needs and operational requirements. 
This collaboration is essential for several reasons: 

▪  Customized  Solutions:  By  working  closely  with  battery  repurposers,  shippers  and  fleet 
owners can ensure that the repurposing solutions are tailored to their operational demands 
and performance expectations, maximizing economic and environmental benefits. 

▪  Optimized Battery Life: Collaboration allows for better tracking and management of battery 
health,  ensuring  that  repurposed  batteries  are  used  efficiently  and  effectively,  thereby 
extending their lifecycle. 

▪  Regulatory  Compliance:  Collaborating  with  experienced  repurposers  ensures  that  all 
regulatory  requirements  are  met,  minimizing  legal  risks  and  ensuring  compliance  with 
environmental and safety standards. 

Partnerships  with  knowledge  partners  can  provide  valuable  insights  into  technology,  market 
dynamics,  and  best  practices,  ensuring  informed  decision-making.  These  collaborations  are 
instrumental  in  successfully  running  pilot  projects  for  deploying  EoFL  e-truck  batteries  in 
secondary applications. 

7 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Glossary  

Battery: Battery refers to any device delivering electrical energy generated by direct conversion 
of  chemical  energy,  having  internal  or  external  storage,  and  consisting  of  one  or  more  non-
rechargeable or rechargeable battery cells, modules or of packs. 

Battery Energy Storage Systems: A battery energy storage system, is a type of energy storage 
system that uses a group of rechargeable batteries to store electrical energy from renewable and 
non-renewable sources for later use. 

Battery  Pack:  Battery  pack  refers  to  any  set  of  battery  cells  or  modules  that  are  connected 
together or encapsulated within an outer casing, to form a complete unit. 

Charge/Discharge  Rate: Charge/discharge rate  refers to the speed at which  energy is either 
stored into or drawn from a battery. 

Circularity/Circular  Economy/Circular  Value  Chain:  Circular  economy  is  a  system  where 
materials never become waste and nature is regenerated. In a circular economy, products and 
materials  are  kept  in  circulation  through  processes  like  maintenance,  reuse,  repurpose, 
remanufacture, recycling, and composting. 

Depth of Cycles/Depth of Discharge: Depth of discharge or depth of battery cycles refers to the 
percentage of a battery's capacity that has been discharged relative to its maximum capacity. In 
other words, it measures how much of the total energy stored in the battery has been used during 
a single discharge cycle. 

End of First Life: The End of First Life of an electric vehicle battery refers to the point at which 
the battery can no longer meet the performance requirements for its initial application, such as 
powering a vehicle. This typically occurs when the battery's capacity has degraded significantly, 
meaning it can store and deliver much less energy than when it was new. 

Recycling:  Recycling  refers  to  the  systematic  process  of  collecting,  sorting,  dismantling,  and 
recovering valuable materials from used batteries. 

Remaining  Useful  Life:  The  remaining  useful  life  of  an  electric  vehicle  battery  refers  to  the 
estimated  duration  before  the  battery's  capacity  declines  to  a  point  (below  70-80%  of  original 
capacity) where it no longer meets the vehicle's operational needs. 

Repurposer: Repurposer refers to an entity or organization that takes used batteries from electric 
vehicles, refurbishes and reconfigures them for a second life application. 

Residual Capacity: Residual capacity of a battery refers to the amount of charge it can still hold 
and deliver compared to its original capacity when it was new. It is a measure of how much usable 
energy the battery can store and provide after being used for a period of time. 

State of Charge: The state of charge of a battery is defined as the ratio between the available 
capacity and the reference capacity, which is the maximum capacity that can be withdrawn from 
the fully charged battery. 

State of Health: The state of health of an electric vehicle battery refers to its current condition 
and performance compared to its original state when it was new. 

Stated Policies Scenario: The Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) reflects existing policies and 
measures,  as  well  as  firm  policy  ambitions  and  objectives  that  have  been  legislated  by 
governments. 

Thermal Runaway: Thermal runaway is a condition where an increase in temperature within the 
battery can lead to further heat generation, potentially resulting in an uncontrollable chain reaction 
that can cause overheating, fire, or explosion. 

8 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Thermal Runaway Propagation Resistance: Thermal runaway propagation resistance refers to 
the ability of a battery to prevent the rapid spread of thermal runaway once it has been initiated 
in one part of the battery cell or pack.  

Total Cost of Ownership: The TCO provides a way to calculate, and then fairly compare, the 
costs of owning and operating a vehicle over a period of time. It combines information on purchase 
costs, ongoing costs such as fueling/charging and maintenance, as well as financing. 

Volumetric  Energy  Density:  Volumetric  energy  density  of  a  battery  refers  to  the  amount  of 
energy it can store per unit volume. In simpler terms, it measures how much energy a battery can 
hold relative to its size or volume. 

9 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

1 

Introduction 

As shippers and fleet owners transition to electric trucks (e-trucks), effectively managing batteries 
at the end of their first life (EoFL) becomes essential, with different battery technologies affecting 
both EoFL options and performance in e-trucks. 

The  increasing  adoption  of  e-trucks  driven  by  stringent  policies  is  expected  to  transform  the 
logistics and transportation industries. The heavy-duty e-truck market share has seen a threefold 
rise from around 0.3% in 2022 to nearly 0.9% share of all new heavy-duty trucks sold in 2023 
(ICCT  2024).  As  shippers  and  fleet  owners  transition  to  e-trucks,  a  new  aspect  emerges:  the 
management of e-truck batteries once their capacity for vehicular use diminishes. Typically, these 
batteries  retain  significant  energy  storage  capabilities,  making  their  secondary  use  a  topic  of 
growing interest. This study explores the potential for repurposing e-truck batteries, examining 
the second life battery (SLB) ecosystem, opportunities, challenges, relevant policies and impacts 
on shippers and fleet owners. It begins with an overview of the current  and the future state of 
battery  technology  and  discusses  the  EoFL  of  e-truck  batteries,  setting  the  stage  for 
understanding their second life potential. 

Battery Technology in E-trucks 

Battery  e-trucks  are  designed  with  a  large  rechargeable  battery  pack  as  the  primary  energy 
source along with an electric motor, inverter, battery charger, controller and charging cable  (SEAI 
2024). The battery packs consist of multiple individual cells configured to store the  energy which 
powers the truck's electric motors (Milence 2023). 

Over  the  years,  rapid  advancements  in  Lithium-ion  Battery  (LiB)  technology  have  established 
them as the preferred choice for e-truck applications due to their higher energy density, improved 
safety,  extended  service  life,  rapid  charging  capabilities,  and  minimal  self-discharge  (Pesaran 
2023; Basma et al. 2021).  

However, LiB performance and energy efficiency can vary based on battery cell chemistry, cell 
format,  and  cell-to-battery-pack  packaging.  The  different  chemistries  come  with  trade-offs  in 
weight,  capacity,  performance,  fast  charging  capability,  packaging,  and  recyclability,  while  the 
different cell formats—prismatic, pouch, and cylindrical—impact the volumetric energy density, 
packing efficiency, and safety, particularly in terms of thermal runaway propagation resistance. 

In  freight  vehicles,  battery  energy  density  is  crucial  as  it  directly  impacts  maximum  payload, 
transport volume and vehicle range (Basma et al. 2021). Freight vehicles are typically used more 
intensively  than light duty vehicles and  are operated  under harsher  conditions.  To  meet these 
requirements, freight vehicles need battery packs capable of withstanding high-power discharges 
and a longer cycle life. To take advantage of ultra-fast charging during long-haul trips, batteries 
need to be capable of withstanding high thermal stresses (Abhyankar et al. 2022). Factors such 
as battery pack cost, charge/discharge rates, and safety are critical considerations in selecting 
the appropriate battery chemistry for commercial vehicles (Volta Foundation 2024). 

Current LiB Chemistries used in Heavy-Duty E-Trucks 

Currently, both Lithium Iron Phosphate (LFP) and high-nickel chemistries like Nickel Manganese 
Cobalt  (NMC)  and  Nickel  Cobalt  Aluminum  (NCA)  are  being  installed  in  heavy-duty  e-trucks 
(Basma et al. 2021).  Amongst these, LFPs & NMCs dominate the heavy-duty e-truck markets in 
Europe (ICCT 2024). OEMs prefer varying LiB chemistries for heavy duty e-truck applications to 
capitalize on their specific advantages which are highlighted below:  

▪  Lithium  Iron  Phosphate:  LFP  battery  chemistries  have  higher  durability  enabling  higher 
charge/discharge rates compared to NMC batteries. In addition, LFP batteries have significant 
cost  advantage  due  to  their  lack  of  cobalt.  While  LFP  batteries  have  lower  energy  density 

10 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

compared to NMCs, they  are less prone to fire related accidents. Moreover, LFPs have the 
highest  battery  life  cycle  comparatively  making  them  more  suitable  for  use  in  second  life 
(Basma et al. 2021). LFP chemistry is widely used in e-trucks manufactured by Daimler and 
DAF (Daimler Trucks 2022; DAF 2024).  

▪  Lithium  Nickel  Manganese  Cobalt:  NMC  batteries  have  the  highest  energy  density 
comparatively  making  it  the  preferred  choice  of  battery  chemistry  for  heavy  duty  e-truck 
manufacturers like Volvo, Scania, MAN and Renault. However, this chemistry offers a lower 
cycle life compared to LFP as seen in the Figure 1 (Basma et al. 2021).  

▪  Lithium Nickel Cobalt Aluminum: NCA batteries deliver higher energy density compared to 
LFP batteries at the same time provides excellent fast charging capability making it suitable 
for e-truck manufacturer Volvo (SAE 2024). However, they have the highest safety concerns 
comparatively.  

Figure 1: Comparison of different types of LiB chemistries used in e-trucks (Miao et al. 
2019). 

Potential Battery Chemistry in Heavy-Duty E-Trucks 

Lithium-sulfur  (Li-S)  batteries  and  solid-state  batteries  (SSB)  are  few  of  the  potential  battery 
chemistries that may be used in heavy-duty e-trucks in the future (SAE 2024).  

▪  Lithium Sulphur Batteries: These batteries have higher energy densities (up to 500 Wh/kg), 
approximately  double  that  of  LFPs  and  NMCs,  presenting  potential  for  heavy-duty  e-truck 
applications.  Challenges  such  as  shorter  cycle  life  and  reduced  performance  in  cold 
temperatures currently limit their commercial viability (SAE 2024; Volta Foundation 2024). 
▪  Solid  State  Batteries:  These  batteries  have  increased  operating  temperature  range, 
increased  battery  safety  and  energy  densities  and  cycle  life  compared  to  LiB  chemistries. 
However, this battery chemistry may have various technological challenges such as the scale-
up  of  material  production,  compatibilities  between  components,  as  well  as  production 
challenges.  Furthermore,  the  initial  SSB  costs  may  be  higher  compared  to  the  current  LiB 
battery technologies (Fraunhofer ISI 2022). 

End of First Life of E-truck Batteries 

Subjected to extreme operating temperatures and changing charge/discharge rates,  LiBs in e-
truck applications degrade drastically during the first five years of operation and are designed for 
over  a  decade  of  useful  life  in  most  cases  (European  Commission  2023b;  Zhu  et  al.  2021). 
Typically, these batteries reach their EoFL in e-truck application as soon as its remaining usable 
capacity  drops  to  80%  of  its  original  capacity  (Zhu  et  al.  2021).  Yet,  prior  to  recycling,  these 
batteries  can  live  a  second  life  (as  shown  in  Figure  2),  even  when  they  no  longer  meet  EV 
performance  standards  but  are  still  able  to  perform  sufficiently  to  serve  less-demanding 
applications, such as stationary energy-storage services. These batteries can support renewable 
energy integration, provide backup power, and enhance grid stability (Hassan et al. 2023). For 

11 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

shippers and fleet owners, this presents an opportunity to extract additional value from their e-
truck investments. By extending the economic lifetime of the batteries, second life use of batteries  
lowers their overall lifecycle costs. If the battery materials are recycled and return to the economy 
at the end of second life, this also contributes to a circular battery economy, as shown in Figure 
2. 

Figure 2: Lifecycle of an e-truck battery (Kotak et al. 2021).  

Given the high investment costs needed for battery electric vehicles, options for reducing lifetime 
costs like SLB applications are crucial. The next section outlines the concept of battery reuse and 
repurposing, highlighting the anticipated market demand for SLBs and their benefits. It details the 
assessment and preparation processes for second life use, provides real-world examples, and 
showcases innovative business models leveraging the value of these batteries. 

12 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

2  Second Life Batteries: A Comprehensive 

Overview  

Several  pilots  have  demonstrated  the  substantial  opportunity  for  shippers  and  fleet  owners  to 
deploy EoFL e-truck batteries in diverse second-life applications, due to its significant economic, 
environmental, and social sustainability benefits. 

The market for battery electric trucks is expected to expand to 31% of sales share in 2035 under 
the  stated  policy  scenario,  driven  by  recent  emissions  standards  in  the  EU  (IEA  2024).  The 
anticipated increase in  adoption will significantly boost  the demand for  electric truck batteries. 
Global demand for LiB’s is projected to rise from about 700 GWh in 2022 to approximately 4.7 
TWh by 2030, with mobility applications accounting for around 4,300 GWh (McKinsey & Company 
2023).  To  meet  this  growing  demand  sustainably,  the  industry  must  transition  from  a  linear 
approach to adopting circular value chain strategies, such as extending battery lifespan (battery 
second life) and recycling (providing secondary materials), as illustrated in Figure 3.  

Figure 3: End of Life options for e-truck batteries (Börner et al. 2022). 

EU Battery Regulation 2023/1542 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2023 
concerning batteries and waste batteries, sets targets for recycling used EV batteries. However, 
utilizing these batteries for second life applications before recycling has emerged as a viable and 
advantageous option, as these batteries still retain about 70-80% of their original capacity (Zhu 
et al. 2021). Employing EoFL e-truck batteries in second life applications can extend their use 
phase, delaying recycling and preventing unnecessary disposal. 

The  concept  of  SLB  involves  remanufacturing,  repurposing,  and  reusing  batteries  after  their 
primary use in EVs: 

▪  Reuse: Reuse refers to any operation by which products or components that are not waste 
are used again for the same purpose for which they were conceived (European Commission 
2024).  

13 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

▪  Remanufacturing: Remanufacturing refers to any technical operation on a used battery that 
includes the disassembly and evaluation of all its battery cells and modules and the use of a 
certain number of battery cells and modules that are new, used or recovered from waste, or 
other battery components, to restore the battery capacity to at least 90 % of the original rated 
capacity, and where the state of health (SoH) of all individual battery cells does not differ more 
than  3  %  between  cells,  and  results  in  the  battery  being  used  for  the  same  purpose  or 
application as the one for which the battery was originally designed (European Commission 
2023a). 

▪  Repurposing: Repurposing involves any operation that results in a battery, that is not a waste 
battery, or parts thereof being used for a purpose or application other than that for which the 
battery was originally designed (European Commission 2023a). 

Market Overview 

Global battery demand is projected to reach 4.7 TWh by 2030, with the mobility sector constituting 
the  highest  demand,  as  illustrated  in  the  accompanying  .  This  surge  in  demand  presents  a 
significant opportunity for reusing or repurposing EoFL e-truck batteries for mobility applications. 

Figure 4: Global LiB demand in GWh (McKinsey & Company 2023). 

Furthermore,  the  figure  indicates  that  stationary  storage  is  the  second-largest  sector  for  LiB 
demand. According to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), the total installed 
capacity  of  stationary  batteries  is  expected  to  reach  421  GWh  by  2030  (Gyalai-Korpos  et  al. 
2020). With the rapid increase in EV adoption and the anticipated accelerated growth over the 
next  decade,  it  is  projected  that  by  2030,  the  supply  of  SLB  for  stationary  applications  could 
exceed  200  GWh  annually,  representing  a  market  valued  at  $30  billion  globally  (McKinsey  & 
Company  2019).  The  potential  for  repurposed  e-truck  batteries  for  second-life  applications  is 
substantial, especially since the primary markets for EVs such as China, the United States, and 
the EU align with regions where stationary storage demand is projected to be highest. 

Benefits of a Second Life Battery Ecosystem  

Once batteries reach the EoFL in e-truck applications, they can still contain up to 80% of their 
original capacity. Utilizing these batteries in second life applications offers significant benefits. 

Reduced Total Cost of Ownership: The high initial purchase cost of e-trucks, primarily due to 
the expensive  LiBs (around 40% of the total cost), creates a substantial price gap  between  e-
trucks  and  internal  combustion  trucks  (König  et  al.  2021).  Reusing  EoFL  e-truck  batteries  in 
second life applications can reduce battery costs and, consequently, e-truck prices (Chirumalla 
et al. 2023). Studies suggest that SLBs could reduce costs for end-users by approximately 42% 

14 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

compared  to  new  batteries  (elementenergy  2019).  Additionally,  repurposing  batteries  can 
generate additional revenue and lower the overall cost of operating EVs when used to support 
charging activities, thus reducing the TCO of e-trucks (WRI 2023). 

Reduced  Greenhouse  Gas  Emissions  (GHG):  Batteries  are  a  significant  component  of  e-
trucks, accounting for 40%-60% of the GHG emissions from e-truck manufacturing (McKinsey & 
Company 2023). Extending the life of EoFL e-truck batteries through second life concepts can 
mitigate their environmental impact by avoiding the need for new battery manufacturing and the 
associated raw material extraction (Philippot et al. 2022). This extension in battery lifespan could 
range from 7 to 10 years, reducing the need for new batteries. Researchers estimate that up to 
2031, SLB systems could prevent approximately  0.7-1.2 kilotons of  battery-related waste,  and 
circumvent  28-90  kilotons  of  CO2  emissions  by  recovering  renewable  energy  (European 
Commission 2023b). 

Enhanced Social Sustainability: The extraction and supply of raw materials for e-truck batteries, 
such  as  lithium,  cobalt,  and  nickel,  are  unevenly  distributed  globally  and  are  associated  with 
mitigable social sustainability risks  (Steckelberg et al. 2023).  These include child labor,  forced 
labor, unsafe working conditions, violations of indigenous rights and labor laws and several other 
governance  issues  (European  Commission  2023a).  Reusing  or  repurposing  EoFL  e-truck 
batteries  can  significantly  reduce  the  need  for  raw  material  extraction  for  new  battery 
manufacturing, thereby minimizing the associated social sustainability impacts and supply chain 
risks. Additionally, the industry and supply chain created around battery repurposing are expected 
to  generate  additional  jobs  and  revenues,  amounting  to  approximately  $79  million  by  2030 
(elementenergy 2019). 

Preparation and Assessment of End-of-Life EV Batteries for Second-Life 
Applications 

Figure 5: Steps for battery reuse or repurposing (European Commission 2023a; Michelini 
et al. 2023). 

Before EoFL e-truck batteries can be reused or repurposed for second-life applications, they must 
undergo a thorough assessment and preparation process. In the EU, battery holders must comply 
with  Article  73  of  the  Battery  Regulation  2023/1542  concerning  batteries  and  waste  batteries, 
highlighting the preparatory steps  prior to reuse or repurposing. The  process includes several 
critical  steps  as  shown  in  Figure  5:.  Additionally,  international  standards  IEC  63330-1:2024 
(published as of 24th June 2024) provides basic requirements and a procedure to evaluate the 

15 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

performance and safety of used batteries and battery systems and provide general requirements 
for application of repurposed batteries (IEC 2024). 

Consideration  of  different  battery  configurations  when  deciding  on  the  appropriate  second  life 
application  is  an  important  part  of  the  battery  assessment  process  post  its  EoFL  in  e-truck 
application. The different SLB configurations are highlighted below (Montes et al. 2022): 

▪  Stacking Used EV Battery Packs: This involves connecting multiple EoFL battery packs with 
minimal modifications, for applications requiring more energy than a single battery pack can 
provide. 

▪  Refurbished  Battery  Made  from  Used  Modules:  This  involves  disassembling  the  battery 
pack to the module level, inspecting the exterior of the modules, conducting characterization 
tests, certifying that the modules meet second-life standards, and integrating them into a new 
battery pack for the intended application. 

▪  Refurbished Modules Made from Used Cells: This involves disassembling battery packs to 
the cell level, and these cells are then repacked into new modules and battery systems. This 
approach  is  particularly  valuable  when  pack  or  module  dimensions  are  not  suitable  for  the 
intended application. 

Typical Applications of Second Life Batteries 

The selection of the preferred second-life application for EoFL e-truck batteries is influenced by 
various factors. Detailed information about the battery's history (such as battery health, residual 
capacity,  internal  resistance,  number  of  cycles,  depth  of  cycles,  etc.)  and  battery  chemistry  is 
crucial. Additionally, the size of storage systems (number of battery packs needed)  as well as 
safety and reliability requirements are important considerations. The typical uses of EoFL e-truck 
batteries are outlined below (Michelini et al., 2023): 

Stationary Category: The primary category for second-life applications of EoFL EV batteries is 
in stationary settings, where the battery remains in a fixed location during its operational cycle. 
Unlike  mobile  or  semi-stationary  applications,  stationary  applications  are  not  subject  to  strict 
weight  and  volume  constraints  and  face  a  lower  risk  of  mechanical  abuse.  This  can  result  in 
relatively less stringent safety requirements. Key stationary applications for EoFL e-truck batteries 
include: 

▪  Peak Shaving: Managing demand quickly for short periods to prevent spikes in consumption. 
▪  Load Shifting/Demand Shifting: Shifting electricity consumption from peak to off-peak hours 

to level out demand and reduce peak loads. 

▪  Buffer Storage: Using EV batteries as buffer storage at charging stations which allows self-

consumption of renewable energy. 

▪  Ancillary  Services:  Providing  supportive  services  such  as  frequency  regulation  to  help 

maintain grid balance by adjusting consumption or production. 

▪  Wholesale Market Arbitrage: Utility-scale energy storage for trading electricity on the spot 

market by selling energy during high demand and buying during off-peak hours. 

Semi-Stationary Category: Second-life applications where batteries are not intended to operate 
while moving but are expected to be relocated frequently fall under the semi-stationary category. 
For example: 

▪  Mobile  Power  Supply:  Power  generators  or  stations  used  to  provide  electricity  in  remote 

locations and automotive mobile charging stations. 

Mobile Category: Mobile applications involve batteries that are expected to move during use. 
Due to relatively lower range and battery capacity requirements SLBs can be suitable for: 

▪  Micro Mobility: Applications such as e-bikes, e-scooters, and e-3 wheelers. 
▪ 

Industrial Vehicles: Applications such as forklifts, automated guided vehicles, and transport 
trolleys. 

▪  Commercial Vehicles: Short-range EVs. 

16 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Second Life Battery Pilot Projects 

Several pilots, in collaboration with repurposers, have been initiated and announced, focusing on 
repurposing EoFL e-truck batteries for stationary storage applications. The examples listed below 
illustrate this: 

▪  Einride has repurposed batteries from its fleet of heavy-duty vehicles into second-life battery 
energy  storage  systems  (SLBESS)  installed  at  the  Einride  Smartcharger  Station  in 
Rosersberg, near Stockholm, Sweden. These batteries,  EoFL from trucks used to transport 
goods in Europe, perform functions such as peak shaving, load shifting, and energy arbitrage 
(Einride 2024). 

▪  Volvo Trucks has collaborated with Connected Energy to repurpose batteries for developing 
SLBESS,  installing  high-powered  charge  points  in  Enfield  and  Carlisle,  United  Kingdom. 
Project experiences report that the SLBBESS developed, named 'E-STOR', is often a more 
affordable  alternative  to  costly  grid  infrastructure  upgrades.  The  E-STOR  systems  provide 
sufficient power to support high-capacity charging points: 350kW and five 22kW electric car 
chargers in Enfield, and a 150kW truck charge point and two 22kW electric car chargers in 
Carlisle (Connected Energy 2024; Volvo 2024). 

▪  MAN is currently exploring the use of SLBs in stationary storage systems in collaboration with 
the University of Kassel. They are investigating the potential of using EoFL battery packs as 
buffer storage  or in another vehicle, utilizing approximately 120 truck battery packs with an 
energy content of 18.6 kWh per pack. These packs originated from MAN's first field trial with 
battery-electric distribution trucks in Austria, which began in 2018 and lasted three years (MAN 
2024; Sustainable Bus 2022). 

▪  Daimler Truck North America has partnered with Nuvation Energy to pilot a SLBESS using 
EoFL batteries from Daimler’s fleet. These systems are designed to assist in charging, peak 
shaving, backup storage, and microgrid scenarios (Daimler Truck North America 2024). 

Due to the limited adoption of e-trucks (only 0.9% of all new heavy trucks sold), most projects 
involving the repurposing of batteries at their EoFL currently focus on passenger vehicles. 

▪  An  early  proof-of-concept  example  was  the  EU-funded  ELSA  (Energy  Local  Storage 
Advanced  System)  project,  where  vehicle  original  equipment  manufacturers  (OEMs) 
Renault and Nissan collaborated to use SLBs from the Nissan Leaf and Renault Kangoo ZE 
for stationary applications. These batteries provided various storage services at six pilot sites, 
including  peak  shaving,  smoothing  solar  photovoltaic  power  generation,  primary  frequency 
services, and reactive power compensation (ELSA 2018). 

▪  Another  notable  project  was  the  Johan  Cruijff  Arena  in  Amsterdam,  where  stationary 
batteries were integrated into the stadium's energy system to  manage high power demand 
peaks  during  football  matches.  About  40%  of  the  batteries  in  the  3MWp-2.8  MWh  battery 
system were second-hand Nissan Leaf batteries. Combined with  a solar photovoltaic array 
and  diesel  generators,  these  batteries  provided  peak  shaving,  backup  power,  frequency 
services, and surplus solar energy storage (Warmerdam 2020). 

Business Models Enabling EoFL Battery Use 

Batteries constitute approximately 40% of the total value of e-trucks. Additionally, as previously 
mentioned,  these  batteries  maintain  significant  residual  value  after  their  initial  use  in  e-truck 
applications.  Recognizing  these  facts,  new  business  models  have  emerged  to  finance  these 
vehicles over their lifetime and address the challenges of high initial purchase costs. We cover a 
few business models here. 

Battery Leasing: An example of battery leasing is the Caledonia bus depot in Glasgow, Scotland, 
where a single company (Hitachi) provides comprehensive support for the initial deployment of 
the buses. This support includes telematics, smart charging software, and on-site decarbonization 
solutions,  such  as  solar  energy  generation  and  stationary  battery  storage.  This  arrangement 
offers fleet operators a single point of contact with a technology provider, enabling them to extend 

17 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

the first life of the battery, assess its SoH at EoFL, and repurpose it for second life use within the 
depot (First Bus & Hitachi, 2021). 

OEM Buyback: The vehicle OEMs, which have the most detailed knowledge about the battery 
materials and manufacture are expected to play a key role in their use  in second life. A model 
pioneered by Nissan and Sumimoto through their Japanese joint venture, 4R, offers  to buy the 
batteries of vehicle users back from them, creating a closed loop circular model. These batteries 
at the end-of-first life are graded and sorted. Depending on their grade, they are reused in vehicles 
like forklifts, grid storage and home storage. Since these repurposed batteries last for another 10 
to 15 years, the batteries have competitive market value (Nissan Motor Corporation 2021). 

3rd Party Purchase: An alternative to the OEM purchasing the battery back from the vehicle user 
is a business model where a 3rd party collectively performs this task for all OEMs. An example is 
the company Spiers New Technologies, based in Oklahoma, USA who in the year 2021 worked 
with EV batteries from General Motors, Ford, Nissan, Volkswagen, Audi, Toyota, Volvo, Porsche. 
Similar to the OEM buyback business model, the 3rd party purchasing the batteries grades them 
for use in a second life. 

As the market for similar services are evolving, EoFL batteries are expected to have resale value 
beyond their utility to fleet owners or operators for energy management at depots. Vehicle OEMs 
are anticipated to play a role in creating these markets. Additionally, the use of third-party software 
for battery analytics, diagnostics, and SoH estimation is emerging as a key enabler of increased 
transparency in the battery ecosystem facilitating reuse and repurposing. 

The  following  section  presents  economic  cases  of  SLBs  in  stationary  storage  applications 
highlighting its impact on road freight electrification making the above business models viable.  

18 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
  
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

3 

Impact on Road Freight Electrification 

SLBs  facilitate  road  freight  electrification  by  demonstrating  a  clear  economic  case  to  support 
charging infrastructure, thereby making the business models outlined in chapter 2 viable. 

Insufficient charging infrastructure in terms of required energy and power output to support the 
operation of large fleet, is one of the significant challenges the road freight sector is facing while 
transitioning  to  e-HDVs.  The  emerging  second  life  market  for  EoFL  e-truck  batteries  offers 
significant benefits to road freight electrification by addressing  these issues to a certain extent. 
This section presents case studies demonstrating clear economic cases for deploying EoFL e-
truck batteries in second life application, leading to a positive impact on road freight electrification.  

Electricity Distribution Support at Charging Depots  

Distribution support involves using  battery energy storage systems (BESS) to provide support 
during significant increases in peak demand, which can  occur due to  concentrated loads at e-
truck depots or charging hubs. The BESS can enable energy storage (including from renewable 
sources) allowing for dynamic increase in capacity through the “charge at trough, discharge at 
peak” method.  

When SLBESS instead of new batteries are deployed to provide distribution support for charging 
infrastructure, a capital cost reduction for the distribution support system is observed.  A capital 
cost reduction of around 25% for an operating duration of about 2hrs and 35% for an operating 
duration of about 6hrs is observed.  The reduction in the capital cost increases with increase in 
the duration for which the BESS is operated as depicted in the Figure 6: Capital cost reduction 
(%) of distribution support system for charging, using SLBs (elementenergy 2019)..  

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

)

%

(

n
o

i
t
c
u
d
e
R

t
s
o
C

l

a

t
i

p
a
C

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Duration of BESS usage for distribution  support (h)

Figure 6: Capital cost reduction (%) of distribution support system for charging, using 
SLBs (elementenergy 2019). 

Replace Peaking Plants with SLBESS 

Peaking  plants  are  often  inefficient  thermal  power  plants  that  operate  primarily  during  peak 
demand periods. Since they supply power only occasionally, their electricity commands a much 
higher price per kilowatt-hour than base load power. BESS can be used to replace these power 
plants and address the required demand.  

19 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Three levels of deployment were tested, 
each a combination of power and energy 
stored.  

It  was  observed  that  when  BESS  was 
used to replace traditional peaking plants 
a total savings was observed (fuel saving 
and  savings  due  to  avoided  investment 
in  peak  capacity).  However,  the  net 
savings  started  to  reduce  beyond  a 
certain  level  of  deployment  due  to  the 
Interestingly,  when 
cost  of  BESS. 
SLBESS  were  used,  their  lower  cost 
allowed greater levels of deployment that 
is still economically viable as seen in the 
Figure 7: Comparison of net savings for 
levels  of  SLBs 
various  deployment 
(elementenergy 2019)..  

Figure 7: Comparison of net savings for various 
deployment levels of SLBs (elementenergy 2019). 

Benefits for Road Freight Electrification 

SLBs  demonstrate  a  clear  economic  case  which  can  be  observed  from  the  above  two 
applications. These economic cases conclude several benefits for actors involved in road freight 
electrification which are highlighted below: 

Vehicle fleets typically recharge overnight  at depots. Transitioning to 100% fleet electrification 
could result in most e-trucks recharging simultaneously, creating a substantial localized electricity 
demand  that  might  exceed  existing  network  capabilities.  Deploying  SLBESS  for  distribution 
support  at  charging  hubs  or  depots  can  reduce  or  avoid  the  need  for  deploying  network 
reinforcements (which is time consuming) to handle such large, concentrated loads. Additionally, 
deploying  SLBBESS  to  replace  peaking  power  plants  supports  higher  levels  of  economic  grid 
battery deployment during peak demand periods. 

These  applications  lower  the  substantial  network  costs  for  fleet  operators  and  grid  operators 
respectively,  at  the  same  time  ensuring  adequate  energy  and  power  output  is  delivered,  thus 
facilitating  road  freight  electrification.  The  reduction  in  network  costs  translates  to  lower  costs 
associated with charging activities, further reducing the TCO of e-trucks. 

In  addition  to  the  economic  benefits  from  the  above-mentioned  applications,  SLBESS  can 
generate additional revenue by providing ancillary or balancing services to transmission system 
operators and by engaging in energy price arbitrage, thereby reducing net energy costs. 

Furthermore, SLBESS allows the integration of local networks with renewable energy sources 
and  the  replacement  of  traditional  peaking  plants  with  renewable  sources.  This  leads  to  a 
reduction in GHG emissions from charging activities and makes energy available at a lower cost, 
further reducing the TCO of e-trucks. 

In  conclusion,  the  residual  value  of  EoFL  e-truck  batteries  can  be  effectively  utilized  through 
second-life  applications  to  support  road  freight  electrification.  This  approach  is  particularly 
beneficial for larger batteries, such as those used in trucks or buses, because their residual value 
has a more significant impact on the TCO comparatively (Lebeau et al. 2019).  

However,  before  deploying  EoFL  e-truck  batteries  in  second-life  applications,  it  is  crucial  to 
thoroughly understand the technical and economic challenges and, regulatory landscape, which 
are detailed in the next section. 

20 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

4  Challenges and Regulatory Landscape  

The design of current battery packs and systems, declining gap between cost of new battery and 
SLBs  and  underdeveloped  regulations  present  significant  challenges  that  must  be  considered 
when choosing battery reuse or repurposing as EoFL options e-truck batteries. 

The  battery  second  life  strategies  offer  a  hopeful  path  towards  improving  both  the  economic 
feasibility and environmental impact of electric trucks. Nevertheless, there are several technical 
and economic challenges and regulatory gaps to their successful use in second life applications 
which are highlighted in this section. The section also presents a few regulatory recommendations 
to facilitate the reuse and repurposing practices. 

Technical Challenges and Regulatory Gaps 

There are various technical challenges and regulatory gaps that impact the economic viability of 
deploying EoFL battery packs in second life applications. These challenges span across various 
steps in the process of battery reuse or repurposing. 

The  initial  step  involves  collecting  EoFL  e-truck  batteries.  The  EU  currently  lacks  specific 
collection  and  refurbishment  targets  and  a  traceability  mechanism  for  EoFL  e-truck  batteries, 
which would ensure these batteries are used to their full potential before recycling and prevent 
unwarranted  disposal.  Additionally,  the  trend  towards  structurally  integrated  battery  designs 
complicates the removal process for reuse or repurposing, raises safety concerns, and increases 
the costs of removal and collection (Johannisson 2023).  

Upon  collection,  the  batteries  undergo  inspection  to  assess  various  technical  parameters. 
However, the lack of readily available information on battery design, chemistry, SoH, and usage 
history necessitates costly tests and  limits process optimization (Lih et al. 2012). Furthermore, 
the absence of uniform SoH estimation methods and EoFL decision-making criteria complicates 
safe decision-making regarding whether a battery should be recycled or repurposed and for what 
application. 

Battery  packs  differ  significantly  in  size,  chemistry,  and  format  to  meet  specific  applications, 
resulting  from  a  lack  of  standardization.  This  heterogeneity  increases  the  complexity  of  the 
disassembly process, making it labor-intensive and potentially raising the overall cost of battery 
reuse or repurposing (Gu et al. 2023; Mckinsey & Company 2019). Additionally, many modules 
and cells are not designed for easy disassembly, further complicating repurposing efforts (ICCT 
2023).  

Following disassembly, the modules and cells need to be sorted and regrouped based on their 
performance capabilities for specific second-life applications. Challenges in this step include the 
lack  of  indicators,  algorithms,  certification,  and  standards  for  sorting  and  regrouping  cells  and 
modules  (pack  classification,  cell  grading,  pack  recombination,  and  comprehensive  inspection 
and verification procedures) based on performance metrics (Meegoda et al. 2024). This further 
complicates the process and increases refurbishment costs. 

Finally, placing these refurbished batteries in appropriate second-life applications poses its own 
challenges.  The  battery  management  systems  used  in  automotive  applications  are  often 
unsuitable for second-life applications, necessitating adapted control strategies to stabilize power 
output and prevent overheating. This includes designing specialized energy, thermal, and safety 
management systems tailored for second-use applications (Argonne National Laboratory 2020). 
Additionally, equalization strategies must be developed to address the increased inconsistencies 
in the electrochemical behavior of individual cells or modules expected during second-life usage. 
Advanced fault-diagnosis algorithms are also essential to enhance safety by detecting potential 
issues such as internal short circuits (ICCT 2023).  

21 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Economic Challenges  

The economic feasibility of battery reuse/repurposing depends on various factors, such as the 
selling price of new and end-of-life batteries and their lifespan in secondary applications. 

The  above  technical  challenges  and  regulatory  gaps  increase  the  complexity  and  cost  of 
repurposing EoFL battery  packs thereby posing an economic feasibility challenge. Meanwhile, 
advancements in  electrification have led to significant cost reductions in new LiBs. Bloomberg 
New Energy Finance (2022) reported an 80% decrease in the global average price of new LiBs 
from  2013  to  2021.  This  substantial  cost  reduction  drives  the  adoption  of  electric  trucks  and 
renewable energy storage solutions. However, it also challenges the SLB market to find ways to 
lower  the  cost  of  repurposing  to  justify  the  performance  limitations  of  SLBs  compared  to  new 
batteries. Economies of scale and optimized battery reuse processes might help EoFL batteries 
stay price competitive (ICCT 2023).   

Many operators prefer using these batteries to maximize runtime in specific applications, which 
often results in the battery being either discharged to a very low SoC or charged to a high SoC. 
This  practice  negatively  impacts  the  battery's  lifespan  in  second-life  applications,  reducing  its 
economic feasibility compared to new batteries (Mathews et al. 2020). To address this, various 
companies such as Volytica, Twaice, and Voltaiq, offer battery analytics software that monitors 
battery  technical  parameters  over  its  operational  lifetime.  This  software  enables  operators  to 
optimize battery performance, thereby paving way for higher battery life. The analysis of collected 
data  allows  for  rapid  diagnostics,  corrective  maintenance,  predictive  maintenance,  and 
transparent insight into the battery's operational history and state of health at any given moment. 

Regulatory Landscape 

There  are  a  few  regulatory  measures  set  in  the  EU  that  facilitate  cost  effective  EoFL  e-truck 
battery  reuse  and  repurposing  in  the  near  future.  Additionally,  this  study  provides  several 
recommendations  for  governments  to  consider  that  might  address  the  above  challenges  and 
accelerate the reuse and repurposing practices for EoFL e-truck batteries. 

Significance of EU Battery Passport 

Battery  passports  have  emerged  as  a  means  to  increase  standardized  information  and 
transparency of information sharing across the battery value chain. In effect, each battery should 
have labels and QR codes detailing:  

▪ 

▪ 

▪ 

required information on their capacity, material use and origins, performance, durability, 
negative events, such as accidents;  
required periodically recorded information on the operating environmental conditions, 
including temperature, and on the SoC; and  
required guidelines for collection at EoFL and carbon footprint.  

These parameters help a repurposer assess the remaining useful life, and other relevant battery 
parameters necessary to estimate the residual value of EoFL e-truck batteries. This, therefore, 
helps facilitate the reuse and repurposing of these batteries in the right secondary application. In 
the  EU,  the  Battery  Regulation  2023/1542  mandates  battery  passports  for  EVs  from  2027 
onwards. For batteries which are subject to processes to prepare them for reuse, repurpose or 
remanufacturing,  a  new  passport  will  need  to  be  linked  to  the  original  battery  (European 
Commission 2023a). 

Extended Producer Responsibility for Batteries 

Batteries are also subject to the principle of extended producer responsibility (EPR) in several 
geographies, including the EU, India, South Korea, Brazil and several states in the US (Rufino 
Júnior  et  al.  2024;  CPCB  2022)  that  would  eliminate  unwarranted  disposal  of  these  EoFL 
batteries. Based on this principle, the producers of batteries and the producers of products that 
include a battery are responsible for the waste management of batteries that enter the market as 

22 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

a  result  of  their  activities,  extending  to  the  financing  of  collection  and  recycling.  Economic 
operators placing on the market a battery that results from preparation for re-use, repurposing or 
remanufacturing operations are also subjected to the EPR principles. 

Regulatory Recommendations 

Incentivizing Domestic Capacity for Battery Reuse and Repurposing: Governments should 
enhance domestic capacity for reuse and repurposing by developing incentive programs, creating 
supportive tax and trade provisions, and fostering public-private partnerships to accelerate the 
second life markets like The Battery Materials Processing Grants in the USA. This grant makes 
more than $3 billion  available to state and local governments, for-profit and  non-profit entities, 
and national laboratories to support domestic capacity for the reuse and recycling of  batteries 
through project demonstration and other uses (U.S Department of Energy 2024). 

Create a Framework to Ensure that EoFL Batteries are Handled Responsibly and Used to 
Maximum  Potential:  Several  countries  including  the  EU  have  mandated  EPR,  that  make 
manufacturers responsible for the collection of EoFL batteries to prevent unwarranted disposal. 
However, to implement these regulations successfully, collection and refurbishment targets and 
traceability  mechanism  are  crucial.  For  instance,  in  China,  the  government  established  a 
traceability  management  platform  in  2018  to  track  electric  vehicle  batteries  throughout  their 
lifetime,  whereas  India’s  regulation  on  Battery  Waste  Management  2022  states  collection  and 
refurbishment  targets  for  EoFL  EV  batteries  (Battery  Waste  Management  Rules,  2022;  ICCT 
2021). 

Establishing Performance and Durability Standards for New Batteries: Governments should 
mandate battery durability requirements incentivizing the production of long-lasting batteries to 
enhance their lifespan and safety throughout their usage, making them more suitable for second 
life applications. Example of such a standard is the Advanced Clean Cars II rule in California that 
states by model year 2031, individual vehicle battery packs are warranted to maintain 75% of their 
energy for eight years or 100,000 miles (CARB 2022).  This will build confidence  amongst the 
users to further invest in reused or repurposed EoFL batteries. 

Standardization  of  Battery  Health  Metrics:  Governments  should  further  standardize  SoH 
metrics to maintain a uniformity in test result for SoH of EoFL e-truck batteries thereby helps in 
informing the best decisions for second-life applications.  

23 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

5  Conclusions  

The adoption of heavy-duty e-trucks in the EU has increased threefold, from nearly 0.3% in 2022 
to 0.9% of all new heavy-duty trucks sold in 2023, with projections reaching 31% by 2035. These 
trucks  primarily  utilize  LFP  and  NMC  battery  chemistries  due  to  their  advantages  in  energy 
density, lifecycle, charge/discharge rate, and thermal resistance compared to other chemistries. 
A significant portion of these batteries are expected to retain 70-80% of their original capacity at 
the EoFL in e-truck applications. 

To maximize the use  of these EoFL e-truck  batteries, the SLB concept—encompassing  reuse 
and repurposing—has emerged as a viable option. LFP batteries, in particular, are well-suited for 
second life due to their longer battery life compared to NMC batteries. Shippers and fleet owners 
are expected to achieve considerable economic, environmental, and social sustainability benefits 
by deploying EoFL e-truck batteries in second life applications.   

The substantial expected demand for LiBs in mobility and stationary energy storage presents a 
significant  opportunity  for  reusing  or  repurposing  EoFL  e-truck  batteries.  Deploying  EoFL 
batteries in stationary storage applications to provide charging support has a positive impact on 
road  freight  electrification.  Actors  benefit  from  deploying  SLBs,  in  terms  of  reduced  cost  of 
charging e-trucks thereby reducing the TCO of e-trucks as well as reduced costs associated with 
charging  infrastructure  upgrades.  This  would  allow  a  large  fleet  of  e-trucks  to  charge 
simultaneously  at  depots,  minimizing 
time  delays  associated  with  network 
reinforcements. It also enables the use of renewable energy, thereby lowering GHG emissions 
from charging activities. 

large 

the 

However, technical and economic challenges remain while choosing reuse or repurposing as an 
EoFL option for e-truck batteries. These challenges include battery technology heterogeneity, lack 
of means to accurately estimate remaining useful battery life, complex disassembly processes, 
and the need for robust BMS. These issues need to be addressed to make SLBs economically 
viable and establish the SLB markets. Additionally, the declining cost of new battery packs for e-
trucks  makes  it  essential  for  reuse  and  repurposing  costs  to  be  price-competitive.  The  EU's 
requirement for a digital battery passport from 2027, with other regions expected to follow with 
similar regulations, is anticipated to make repurposing more cost-effective by addressing current 
technical  challenges  related  to  data  sharing.  Moreover,  specific  regulatory  measures  such  as 
standards for battery durability and performance, estimating battery health metrics, collection and 
refurbishment targets, and financial support from the government would greatly enhance the SLB 
markets, making EoFL batteries economically viable for second-life applications. 

As the relevant stakeholders address these challenges, logistic actors can also play a crucial role 
in  enabling  reuse  and  repurposing  of  EoFL  e-truck  batteries.  This  study  provides  a  few 
recommendations that shippers and fleet owners can incorporate to obtain the benefits through 
SLB concepts: 

Recommendations for Logistics Sector 

Mandatory Battery Passport in Procurement Criteria: When procuring e-trucks, it is essential 
to ensure that the e-truck batteries come with a digital battery passport, making this a mandatory 
procurement requirement. Although the EU battery regulations mandate digital battery passports 
only from 2027, making this a mandatory requirement now will help shippers and fleet owners 
ease the repurposing process later, making it safe and cost-effective to deploy these batteries for 
the right second life application. 

Collaboration  with  Battery  Reuse  or  Repurposing  Companies  and  Knowledge  Partners: 
Shippers and fleet owners should actively collaborate with reputable battery reuse or repurposing 
companies to gain a thorough understanding of their specific needs and operational requirements. 
This collaboration is essential for several reasons: 

24 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

▪  Customized  Solutions:  By  working  closely  with  battery  repurposers,  shippers  and  fleet 
owners can ensure that the repurposing solutions are tailored to their operational demands 
and performance expectations, maximizing economic and environmental benefits. 

▪  Optimized Battery Life: Collaboration allows for better tracking and management of battery 
health,  ensuring  that  repurposed  batteries  are  used  efficiently  and  effectively,  thereby 
extending their lifecycle. 

▪  Regulatory  Compliance:  Collaborating  with  experienced  repurposers  ensures  that  all 
regulatory  requirements  are  met,  minimizing  legal  risks  and  ensuring  compliance  with 
environmental and safety standards. 

Partnerships  with  knowledge  partners  can  provide  valuable  insights  into  technology,  market 
dynamics,  and  best  practices,  ensuring  informed  decision-making.  These  collaborations  are 
instrumental  in  successfully  running  pilot  projects  for  deploying  EoFL  e-truck  batteries  in 
secondary applications. 

25 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Bibliography 

Abhyankar,  N.  et  al.  (2022)  Freight  trucks  in  India  are  primed  for  electrification.  https://eta-
publications.lbl.gov/sites/default/files/electric_trucks_in_india_-_final_nov7.pdf  

Argonne 
Battery 
https://afdc.energy.gov/files/u/publication/battery_second_life_faq.pdf  

Laboratory 

National 

(2020) 

Second 

Life. 

Basma,  H.,  Beys,  Y.,  &  Rodriguez,  F.  (2021).  Battery  electric  tractor-trailers  in  the  European 
Union: A vehicle technology analysis. 

Battery  Waste  Management  Rules  (2022)  Battery  Waste  Management  Rules,  CPCB. 
https://cpcb.nic.in/rules-5/  

Bloomberg New Energy Finance. (2022). Lithium-ion Battery Pack Prices Rise for First Time to 
an Average of $151/kWh [blog post]. https://about.bnef.com/blog/lithium-ion-battery-packprices-
rise-for-first-time-to-an-average-of-151-kwh/  

CARB (2024). California Air Resources Board, California moves to accelerate to 100% new zero-
Board. 
emission 
https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/news/california-moves-accelerate-100-new-zero-emission-vehicle-sales-
2035  

Resources 

California 

vehicle 

sales 

2035 

Air 

by 

| 

Chirumalla, K., Kulkov, I., Vu, F., & Rahic, M. (2023). Second life use of Li-ion batteries in the 
heavy-duty  vehicle  industry:  Feasibilities  of  remanufacturing,  repurposing,  and  reusing 
approaches. 
42. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2023.10.007 

Consumption, 

Sustainable 

Production 

and 

Connected  Energy  (2024)  Energy  Storage  Systems  help  Volvo  truck  dealerships  to  electrify, 
Connected  Energy.  https://connected-energy.co.uk/news/energy-storage-systems-help-volvo-
truck-dealerships-to-electrify/  

Daimler Truck (2022). Mercedes-Benz Trucks to unveil the eActros LongHaul electric truck for 
September  
long-distance 
https://www.daimlertruck.com/en/newsroom/pressrelease/mercedes-benz-trucks-to-unveil-the-
eactros-longhaul-electric-truck-for-long-distance-transport-in-september-51968530  

transport 

in 

Daimler Truck (2023). Kick-off in Hanover: Stationary energy storage system consisting of used 
eCitaro batteries goes into operation, Daimler Truck.  

Daimler  Truck  North  America  (2024).  Daimler  Truck  North  America  provides  second  life  to 
Daimler. 
commercial 
https://northamerica.daimlertruck.com/PressDetail/daimler-truck-north-america-provides-
second-2024-05-20/  

batteries, 

vehicle 

the 

(2024)  Extending 

Einride 
lives 
https://einride.tech/insights/phased-out-ev-batteries-get-a-new-life-in-energy-storage  
Elementenergy  (2019).  Batteries  on  wheels:  the  role  of  battery  electric  cars  in  the  EU  power 
https://te-
system 
cdn.ams3.cdn.digitaloceanspaces.com/files/2019_06_Element_Energy_Batteries_on_wheels_P
ublic_report.pdf  

batteries,  Einride. 

phased-out  EV 

beyond. 

and 

of 

26 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

ELSA  (2018)  Energy  Local  Storage  Advanced  system  D6.3  Results  of  service  evaluation. 
www.elsa-h2020.eu  

European  Commission  (2024)  Directive  2008/98/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council  of  19 November  2008  on  Waste  and  Repealing  Certain  Directives  (Text  with  EEA 
Relevance)Text with EEA Relevance. http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2008/98/2024-02-18/eng 

European  Commission  (2023a)  Regulation  -  2023/1542  -  en  -  EUR-lex,  EUR.  https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2023/1542/oj  

——— (2023b) Renewable energy storage from second-life batteries is viable but may benefit 
from  subsidies.  https://environment.ec.europa.eu/news/renewable-energy-storage-second-life-
batteries-viable-may-benefit-subsidies-2023-09-13_en  

First Bus & Hitachi (2021) First Bus and Hitachi Europe to drive zero emission agenda forward 
via strategic partnership  https://www.hitachi.com/New/cnews/month/2021/11/211105c.pdf  

Fraunhofer 
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/cct/2022/SSB_Roadmap.pdf  

Solid-state 

roadmap 

battery 

(2022) 

ISI 

2035+. 

Gu, X., Bai, H., Cui, X., Zhu, J., Zhuang, W., Li, Z., Hu, X., & Song, Z. (2023). Challenges and 
Opportunities  for  Second-life  Batteries:  A  Review  of  Key  Technologies  and  Economy 
(arXiv:2308.06786). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.06786 

Gyalai-Korpos,  M.,  Zentkó,  L.,  Hegyfalvi,  C.,  Detzky,  G.,  Tildy,  P.,  Hegedűsné  Baranyai,  N., 
Pintér,  G.,  &  Zsiborács,  H.  (2020).  The  Role  of  Electricity  Balancing  and  Storage:  Developing 
Input Parameters for the European Calculator for Concept Modeling. Sustainability, 12(3), Article 
3. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12030811 

Hassan, A., Khan, S. A., Li, R., Su, W., Zhou,  X., Wang, M., & Wang, B. (2023). Second-Life 
Batteries:  A  Review  on  Power  Grid  Applications,  Degradation  Mechanisms,  and  Power 
Electronics 
12. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries9120571 

Architectures. 

Batteries, 

Interface 

Article 

9(12), 

ICCT  (2021)  China’s  New  Energy  Vehicle  Industrial  Development  Plan  for  2021  to  2035 
https://theicct.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/China-new-vehicle-industrial-dev-plan-
jun2021.pdf  

ICCT (2023)  Scaling up reuse and recycling of electric vehicle batteries. https://theicct.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/02/recycling-electric-vehicle-batteries-feb-23.pdf  

ICCT  (2024)  EUROPEAN  HEAVY-DUTY  VEHICLE  MARKET  DEVELOPMENT  QUARTERLY 
https://theicct.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/ID-77-
(JANUARY–DECEMBER 
%E2%80%93-EU-R2Z-Q3-Market-Spotlight-A4-50114-v5.pdf  

2023). 

IEA,  I.  (2024)  Outlook  for  electric  mobility  –  global  EV  outlook  2024  –  analysis,  IEA. 
https://www.iea.org/reports/global-ev-outlook-2024/outlook-for-electric-mobility  

IEC.  (2024).  IEC  63330-1:  2024  |  Repurposing  of  secondary  batteries  -  Part  1:  General 
requirements https://webstore.iec.ch/en/publication/66561 

Johannisson,  A.  (2023).  Outlook  of  EV  battery  pack  design 
portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1786790/FULLTEXT01.pdf  

trends.  https://kth.diva-

27 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

König, A., Nicoletti, L., Schröder, D., Wolff, S., Waclaw, A., & Lienkamp, M. (2021). An Overview 
of  Parameter  and  Cost  for  Battery  Electric  Vehicles.  World  Electric  Vehicle  Journal,  12,  21. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/wevj12010021 

Kotak, Y., Marchante Fernández, C., Canals Casals, L., Kotak, B. S., Koch, D., Geisbauer, C., 
Trilla, L., Gómez-Núñez, A., & Schweiger, H.-G. (2021). End of Electric Vehicle Batteries: Reuse 
vs. Recycle. Energies, 14(8), Article 8. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14082217 

Lebeau, P., Macharis, C., & Van Mierlo, J. (2019). How to Improve the Total Cost of Ownership 
of Electric Vehicles: An Analysis of the Light Commercial Vehicle Segment. World Electric Vehicle 
Journal, 10(4), Article 4. https://doi.org/10.3390/wevj10040090  

Lih,  W.-C.,  Yen,  J.-H.,  Shieh,  F.-H.,  &  Liao,  Y.-M.  (2012).  Second  Use  of  Retired  Lithium-ion 
Battery  Packs  from  Electric  Vehicles:  Technological  Challenges,  Cost  Analysis  and  Optimal 
Business Model. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6228326 

Madlener, R., & Kirmas, A. (2017). Economic Viability of Second-Life Electric Vehicle Batteries 
for 
Journal. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2954629 

Households. 

Electronic 

Storage 

Energy 

Private 

SSRN 

in 

MAN  (2024)  Batteries  from  man:  Full  of  energy  and  powering  towards  electromobility,  MAN 
Engines. https://www.man.eu/engines/en/in-focus/engines/batteries-from-man-127744.html  

Mathews, I., Xu, B., He, W., Barreto, V., Buonassisi, T., & Peters, I. M. (2020). Technoeconomic 
model of second-life batteries for utility-scale solar considering calendar and cycle aging. Applied 
Energy, 269, 115127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115127 

McKinsey & Company (2019) Second-life EV batteries: The newest value pool in Energy Storage. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/second-life-ev-
batteries-the-newest-value-pool-in-energy-storage  

McKinsey  &  Company 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/battery-2030-
resilient-sustainable-and-circular  

(2023)  Battery  2030:  Resilient,  sustainable,  and  Circular. 

Meegoda, J., Charbel, G., & Watts, D. (2024). Second Life of Used Lithium-Ion Batteries from 
Electric 
5. 
USA. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/environments11050097 

Environments, 

Vehicles 

Article 

11(5), 

the 

in 

Miao, Y., Hynan, P., von Jouanne, A., & Yokochi, A. (2019). Current Li-Ion Battery Technologies 
in  Electric  Vehicles  and  Opportunities 
for  Advancements.  Energies,  12,  1074–1094. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/en12061074 

Michelini, E., Höschele, P., Ratz, F., Stadlbauer, M., Rom, W., Ellersdorfer, C., & Moser, J. (2023). 
Potential  and  Most  Promising  Second-Life  Applications  for  Automotive  Lithium-Ion  Batteries 
Considering  Technical,  Economic  and  Legal  Aspects.  Energies,  16(6),  Article  6. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/en16062830 

Montes, T., Etxandi-Santolaya, M., Eichman, J., Ferreira, V. J., Trilla, L., & Corchero, C. (2022). 
Procedure for Assessing the Suitability  of Battery Second Life Applications after EV First Life. 
Batteries, 8(9), 122. https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries8090122 

Pesaran, A. A. (2023). Lithium-Ion Battery Technologies for Electric Vehicles. IEEE Electrification 
Magazine, 11(2), C2–C2. https://doi.org/10.1109/MELE.2023.3264919 

28 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second Life of E-Truck Batteries for Sustainable Logistics 

Philippot, M., Costa, D., Hosen, M. S., Senécat, A., Brouwers, E., Nanini-Maury, E., Van Mierlo, 
J.,  &  Messagie,  M.  (2022).  Environmental  impact  of  the  second  life  of  an  automotive  battery: 
Reuse  and  repurpose  based  on  ageing  tests.  Journal  of  Cleaner  Production,  366,  132872. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.132872 

Rufino  Júnior,  C.  A.,  Riva  Sanseverino,  E.,  Gallo,  P.,  Koch,  D.,  Diel,  S.,  Walter,  G.,  Trilla,  L., 
Ferreira,  V.  J.,  Pérez,  G.  B.,  Kotak,  Y.,  Eichman,  J.,  Schweiger,  H.-G.,  &  Zanin,  H.  (2024). 
Towards  to  Battery  Digital  Passport:  Reviewing  Regulations  and  Standards  for  Second-Life 
Batteries. Batteries, 10(4), Article 4. https://doi.org/10.3390/batteries10040115 

SAE  (2024)  Volvo  Trucks’  Battery  Chemistry  of  Choice:  NCA  Lithium-Ion,  SAE  International. 
https://www.sae.org/news/2024/05/volvo-trucks-battery-chemistry  

SEAI (2024) How electric vehicles work, Sustainable Energy Authority Of Ireland. Available at: 
https://www.seai.ie/technologies/electric-vehicles/what-is-an-electric-vehicle/how-electric-
vehicles-work/  

Steckelberg, A., Dormido, H., Mellen, R., Rich, S., & Brown, C. (n.d.). The underbelly of electric 
vehicles. 
from 
Retrieved 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/interactive/2023/electric-car-batteries-geography/ 

Washington 

2024, 

Post. 

June 

28, 

Sustainable Bus (2022) Man kicks off a 2nd life project for use of vehicles’ batteries in stationary 
storage  systems,  Sustainable  Bus.  https://www.sustainable-bus.com/components/man-project-
second-life-batteries/  

U.S Department of Energy (2024)  Battery Manufacturing and recycling grants | Department of 
Energy. https://www.energy.gov/mesc/battery-manufacturing-and-recycling-grants  

UL 1974 (no date) UL 1974: Creating a safe second life for electric vehicle batteries, UL Solutions. 
https://www.ul.com/resources/ul-1974-creating-safe-second-life-electric-vehicle-batteries   
Volta Foundation (2024) Battery report 2023, Volta Foundation. https://volta.foundation/battery-
report  

Volvo (2024) Volvo Energy’s Second Life and Battery Circularity Story: An interview with Elisabeth 
Larsson,  Welcome 
https://www.volvoenergy.com/en/news-
Energy. 
media/news/2024/apr/volvo-energys-second-life-and-battery-circularity-story-an-interview-with-
elisabeth-larsson.html  

Volvo 

to 

Warmerdam,  J. 
https://pure.hva.nl/ws/portalfiles/portal/17123313/SEEV4_City_Johan_Cruijff_ArenA_Operation
al_Pilot_Final_Report.pdf  

report  –  Johan  Cruijff  ArenA  Operational  Pilot. 

(2020).  Final 

WRI  (2023)  How  to  ensure  a  sustainable  future  for  Electric  School  Bus  Batteries,  World 
https://www.wri.org/technical-perspectives/electric-school-bus-battery-
Resources 
sustainability  

Institute. 

Zhu, J., Mathews, I., Ren, D., Li, W., Cogswell, D., Xing, B., Sedlatschek, T., Kantareddy, S. N. 
R., Yi, M., Gao, T., Xia, Y., Zhou, Q., Wierzbicki, T., & Bazant, M. Z. (2021). End-of-life or second-
life  options  for  retired  electric  vehicle  batteries.  Cell  Reports  Physical  Science,  2(8),  100537. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2021.100537 

29 

                      
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Join our journey towards 
efficient and zero-emission 
global freight and logistics 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

www.smartfreightcentre.org 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

info@smartfreightcentre.org  

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
