SFC-SPEC-001 v01: 
MBM SPECIFICATION 

Market Based Measures 
Specification for Logistics 
Emissions Reporting 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Smart Freight Centre. 2024. 

This document is published by the Smart Freight Centre which reserves all rights. Unless otherwise specified, 
or required in the context of its implementation, no part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, or posting on the internet or an 
intranet without prior permission. Permission can be requested from the Smart Freight Centre at the address 
below.  

However,  this  document  is  made  available  for  review  and  to  copy  for  use  (the  “Authorized  Use”)  by  your 
organization under the Smart Freight Centre Conformity Assessment Scheme as defined in the Emissions 
Reporter Manual - MBM Specification, Validation and Verification Body Manual - MBM Specification, and the 
Procedure for use of SFC documents by third parties, all of them available on our website. 

The  Smart  Freight  Centre  logo,  ‘Smart  Freight  Centre’,  ‘SFC’,  ‘Smart  Freight  Assurance’,  ‘Smart  Freight 
Assurance MBM Specification’, are trademarks of the Smart Freight Centre. 

Disclaimer 

The  Specification  expressed  in  this  publication  is  defined  by  Smart  Freight  Centre  and  associated  staff, 
consultants, and management, and does not necessarily reflect the views of the Smart Freight Centre Board 
of Directors. The authors make no representation regarding the utility or lack of utility of this Specification in 
the context of regulatory disclosures of greenhouse gas emissions. 

While  SFC  encourages  the  application  of  Market  Based  Measures  to  accelerate  decarbonization  in  the 
logistics  sector,  the  preparation  and  publication  of  reports  based  on  this  Specification  remains  the  full 
responsibility  of  those  producing  them.  SFC  does  not  assume  responsibility  for  any  consequences  or 
damages resulting directly or indirectly from the preparation of reports or the use of reported data based on 
this Specification. 

Acknowledgements 

Smart Freight Centre thanks the organizations and individuals who participated in a pilot project during 2024, 
testing our checklists and reporting templates and giving feedback on draft versions of this Specification. 

About Smart Freight Centre 

Smart Freight Centre (SFC) is a globally active non-profit organization for climate action in the freight sector. 
Our goal is to mobilize the global logistics ecosystem, in particular our members and partners, in tracking 
and reducing its greenhouse gas emissions. We accelerate the reduction of logistics emissions to achieve a 
zero-emission global logistics sector by 2050 or earlier, consistent with 1.5° pathways.  
www.smartfreightcentre.org 

Suggested citation: Smart Freight Centre. MBM Specification - Market Based Measures Specification for 
Logistics Emissions Reporting. 2024. 

ISBN:  9789083362915 

Publication date: 14 October 2024 

Version Number: SFC-SPEC-001 v01 

Contact: 
Smart Freight Centre  
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM,  
Amsterdam, Netherlands  
P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands  
Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405  
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
assurance@smartfreightcentre.org 

                                                                                                                                                2                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of contents 

   Introduction .............................................................................................................................. 4 
Specification ............................................................................................................................ 6 
1.  Scope ................................................................................................................................ 6 
2.  Normative References ..................................................................................................... 6 
3.  Terms and definitions ...................................................................................................... 6 
4.  General Accounting Principles ....................................................................................... 9 
5.  Scope of Reporting ........................................................................................................ 10 
6.  Quantification Approach ............................................................................................... 10 
7.  Constraints ..................................................................................................................... 12 
8.  Bundling/ Unbundling .................................................................................................... 15 
9.  Monitoring Plan .............................................................................................................. 15 
10.  Reporting ........................................................................................................................ 16 
11.  Internal Controls and Data Retention .......................................................................... 17 
12.  Verification ..................................................................................................................... 17 

Version history 
 __ 
14/10/2024 

First edition 

1 

                                                                                                                                                3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Introduction 

Freight transportation and logistics activities account for approximately 8% of global greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions and between now and 2050 the world will see a doubling in freight emissions, 
according  to  the  International  Transport  Forum1.  Reducing  GHG  emissions  from  freight 
transportation  is  imperative  to  achieve  the  climate  goals  outlined  in  the  Paris  Agreement.  To 
accelerate  climate  action  in  today’s  global,  complex  and  dynamic  supply  chains,  Smart  Freight 
Centre  (SFC)  develops  both  guidance  and  normative  documents  to  help  the  global  logistics 
ecosystem in tracking and reducing its GHG emissions.  

Market  Based  Measures  (MBM)  represent  an  opportunity  to  decarbonize  global  logistics  while 
bridging  geographical,  operational  and  supply  constraints  by  decoupling  the  environmental 
attributes  of  sustainable  transportation  from  the  physical  transportation  of  goods.  While  this 
decoupling is widely seen as a viable way to accelerate uptake of sustainable fuels and energy 
sources,  today’s  standards  and  frameworks  are  largely  bound  to  physical  inventory  accounting 
and are only now opening up to market based inventory accounting. To ensure high quality and 
integrity,  market  based  inventory  accounting  must  have  a  solid  base  that  prevents  erroneous 
double counting, reflects reality, and allows for integration into companies’ emissions inventories.  

This Specification builds on the SFC Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics 
Emissions  Accounting  and  Reporting  (MBM  Framework,  v.1.0,  October  2023)  and  translates 
elements of the guidance provided into a specification for good quality and transparent reporting 
by using a standard language and unambiguous requirements. It specifies the requirements for 
reporting of Market Based Measures under the MBM Specification Scope of the SFC Conformity 
Assessment Scheme (SFC CAS). It supports all supply chain actors to establish, document and 
report high-quality, high-integrity and consistent Low Emissions Transportation Solutions (LETS). 
Finally,  it  outlines  the  necessary  steps  and  provides  concise  documentation  that  can  withstand 
independent verification, demonstrating the credibility and sincerity of the actions taken.  

In  interpreting  the  MBM  Specification  reference  should  be  made  to  the  guidance  in  the  MBM 
Framework. Currently the MBM Specification is focused on the application of emissions profiles to 
emissions inventories. It does not cover the certification of emissions profiles, nor does it apply to 
registries.  

The MBM Framework was developed through a multi-stakeholder consultation process and was 
published  in  2023.  It  remains  valid  as  a  guidance  document.  The  MBM  Specification  does  not 
change any MBM Framework provisions but contains clearer definitions, supplementary notes and 
content specification to be disclosed in an MBM Emissions Report or documented in a Monitoring 
Plan.  This  Specification  was  developed  by  SFC,  considering  input  and  practical  experience  of 
several  pilot  partners  working  with  the  MBM  Framework  guidance  and  assessing  the  MBM 
Specification’s  adequacy  for  use.  The  MBM  Specification  will  evolve  alongside  the  MBM 
Framework, driven by ongoing learnings and stakeholder input.  

This Specification is made available for use (the “Authorized Use”) by your organization under the 
SFC  CAS  as  defined  in  the  Emissions  Reporter  Manual  -  MBM  Specification;  Validation  and 
Verification Body Manual - MBM Specification; and the Procedure for use of SFC documents by 
third parties, all of them available on our website. More information about SFC, its work on Market 
Based Measures and its CAS can be found at www.smartfreightcentre.org. 

1 ITF (2023), ITF Transport Outlook 2023, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/b6cc9ad5-en.  

                                                                                                                                                       4                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
How to use the MBM Specification 

Implementing  a  high-quality  and  high-integrity  MBM  approach  to  transportation  emissions 
accounting  and,  when  applicable,  bringing  them  to  the  market  is  a  process  following  several 
steps. The diagram below shows each step:  

The process starts with designing the measures and creating a product - the Low Emissions 
Transportation Service (LETS). This step is guided by the MBM Framework2. In a second step, 
implementers  will  want  to  document  the  product  and  the  underlying  assumptions,  controls, 
definitions and parameter choices in a Monitoring Plan. Once a measure is implemented, results 
will be disclosed in an MBM Emissions Report, which might undergo third-party verification. 
Lastly,  implementers  may  want  to  communicate  the  results  to  their  customer(s),  via  a 
“certificate” summarizing the key information and containing a link to the verified report. 

Meaning of language used 

Shall:  means  the  requirement  in  the  clause  is  mandatory  with  no  deviation  permitted  and  is 
verifiable. 
Should: means the requirement in the clause is a recommendation. 
May: means the requirement in the clause is permitted. 
Can: means the requirement in the clause is something that is possible to do by the reporter if 
they wish to.  
Disclosed: means that the subject of the clause using this term must be reported in the MBM 
Emissions Report. 
Documented:  means  that  the  subject  of  the  clause  using  this  term  must  be  recorded  in  the 
Monitoring Plan or other underlying procedures/documents within the Reporter's internal control 
system. Some clauses specify where recording must be done, some clauses leave this to the 
discretion of the Reporter. Any information required to be documented must be made available 
to the verifier if they deem that they need it to complete their work.  

2 Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting (Smart Freight Centre, 2023) 

                                                                                                                                                       5                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
                                                 
Specification 

1.  Scope 

This  document  establishes  a  specification  for  a  common  methodology  for  the  voluntary 
quantification  and  reporting  GHG  emissions  associated  with  low  emissions  transportation  and 
Low Emissions Transportation Services (LETS).  

This specification supplements quantification and reporting of transportation chain emissions as 
specified in ISO 14083 on quantification and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions arising from 
transportation chain operations. 

Notes: 
i)  The  MBM  Specification  is  a  flexible  standard  that  needs  to  be  adapted  to  apply  to  the  unique 
circumstances  of  the  Emissions  Reporter  and  the  scope  of  the  report  they  are  preparing.  The  MBM 
Specification provides a standardized set of auditable rules for MBM Emissions Reports additional to those 
in ISO 14083. The general principles of emissions reporting underlying ISO 14083 are equally applicable 
to MBM reporting in accordance with this MBM Specification. 

2.  Normative References 

The following documents are referred to in the text of this specification in such a way that some 
or all of their content constitute requirements of this document. For dated references, only the 
edition  cited  applies.  For  undated  references,  the  latest  edition  of  the  referenced  document 
(including any amendments) applies: 

a)  ISO 14083:2023 - Greenhouse gases - Quantification and reporting of greenhouse 

gas emissions arising from transport chain operations, 

b)  SFC  Voluntary  Market  Based  Measures  Framework  for  Logistics  Emissions 

Accounting and Reporting, 2023, 

c)  ISO14064-1:2018  -  Greenhouse  gases  -  Part  1:  Specification  with  guidance  at  the 
organization level for quantification and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions and 
removals. 

3.  Terms and definitions 

The following terms and definitions shall apply to monitoring and reporting. For definitions of terms 
not specified here, those given in ISO 14083 are applicable. 

3.1  Chain of Custody System: A set of measures underpinning the process by which materials 
or products (and information on those materials or products) are transferred, monitored, and 
controlled as they move through each step in a supply chain. 

3.2  Low  Emissions  Solution  (Solution):  A  product  or  material  provided  to  enable  the 

generation of a LETS. 

Notes: 
i) A Solution is a fuel, electricity, or other product that enables the LETS to be generated. 
ii)  A  Solution  is  considered  to  be  low  emissions  provided  that  it  arises  from  a  non-fossil  source  and/or 
generates a lower emissions intensity than would be given by a standard commercially recognized fossil 
fuel used in the relevant transportation mode. 

                                                                                                                                                       6                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3  Solution  Production  Date:  For  Solution,  the  date  given  on  the  associated  certificate  of 

quality or certificate of analysis. 

3.4  Solution Production Point: For Solution, the geographical location(s) of production of the 

energy carrier.  

3.5  Transportation Service:  A piece of work done for a customer to move freight from one 

location to another.  

Notes: 
i) Includes arranging the transportation of freight. 

3.6  Low Emissions Transportation Service (LETS):  A Transportation Service done using a 

Low Emissions Solution.  

Notes:   
i) A LETS is generated directly (by the consumption of the Solution in the service actually conducted for a 
shipper) or indirectly (by the purchase of the sustainability profile for a directly- or indirectly-generated LETS 
and associating this with the transportation service actually conducted).  

3.7  LETS  Generation:  The  act  of  conducting  low  emissions  transportation  activity,  e.g., 
transporting a mass of freight a certain distance using a Solution, or the act of booking a 
LETS  as  if  the  Solution had  been  used  in  their owned-operated  fleet  (carriers)  or  by  the 
carriers in their supply chain (shippers and LSPs).  

3.8  LETS Generation Date: The date on which the LETS activity was conducted or the date 
the  LETS  was  booked  as  if  the  Solution  had  been  used  in  their  owned-operated  fleet 
(carriers) or by the carriers in their supply chain (shippers and LSPs). If the LETS occurs 
over a number of days, the end date shall be utilized.  

3.9  LETS  Generation  Point:  Geographical  location(s)  where  the  actual  transportation  was 

conducted.  

3.10  Book: The process of definitely recording the emissions profile of a Solution or a LETS in 
a system for tracking this profile. A registry and an internal ledger are examples of such a 
system.  

3.11 Registry: A tool to register and track the transfer of the characteristics of a Solution or LETS. 

3.12 Internal Ledger: System an organization uses to assume the responsibility for recording 

the tracking/ tracing of the characteristics of the booked unit. 

3.13  Booking Date: The day that the process of recording the emissions profile of a Solution 

profile or LETS in a formal database or system for tracking such profile was completed.  

Notes:   
i) See note 3.6(i)  
ii) Where no system like a registry is used to document the Booking Date, the Booking Date of a Solution 
is  the  date  the  Solution  Profile  is  transferred  to  the  recipient.  For  a  LETS,  is  the  date  the  formal 
decision is made to apply a Solution Profile to a transportation.  

3.14  Rebook: The process of recording the emissions profile of a LETS that was generated and 
booked by a carrier and claimed and rebooked by another carrier or LSP for claiming by 
customers in a system for tracking this profile. A registry is an example of such a system.  

3.15  Claim: The process of securing the emissions profile of a Solution or a LETS from a system 

for tracking this profile. A registry is an example of such a system.  

                                                                                                                                                       7                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
3.16  Inventory Inclusion Date: The date that the Solution emissions profile or LETS claim is 

accounted for and integrated into the Reporter's emissions inventory.  

3.17  Shipper: An organization(s) with freight that needs transportation.  

Notes:   
i)  A  shipper  retains  an  LSP  or  contracts  with  carriers  directly  to arrange  transportation  of  the  shipper´s 
freight. 
ii) In the ISO 14083 standard, a shipper is called “transport service user”.  

3.18  Carrier:  An  organization  that  operates  transportation  assets  to  conduct  transportation 

activity in providing transportation services.  

Notes:   
i) In the ISO 14083 standard, a carrier is called “transport operator”.  

3.19  Logistics  Service  Provider  (LSP):  An  organization  that  secures  and  facilitates 

transportation activity for shippers.  

Notes:  
i) LSPs do not operate their own transportation assets or conduct transportation activity; they hire carriers 
or other LSPs to transport freight belonging to the LSP's customers. 
ii) Some LSPs also operate transportation assets for providing transportation services. Where this is the 
service being provided to a customer, the LSP is acting as a carrier.  
ii) In the ISO 14083 standard, an LSP or Freight Forwarder is called “transport service organizer”. 

3.20  Low Emissions Solution Provider (Solution Provider): Organizations that provide a low 

emissions material or product to the transportation market.  

Notes:   
i) Solution Providers do not conduct transportation activity, nor do they contract for freight transportation 
activity on behalf of their customers. Solution Providers provide the products that make a LETS possible. 
One example of a Solution Provider is a supplier of a low emissions fuel.  

3.21  Intended User: The individual or organization identified by the Reporter as being the one 
who  relies  on  information  and  data  disclosed  to  make  decisions.   Source:  ISO  14064-1: 
2018. 

3.22  Additionality:  A  criterion  for  assessing  whether  a  Solution  or  a  Low  Emissions 

Transportation Service (LETS) are required by regulation.  

3.23  Double  Counting:  When  two  or  more  reporting  companies  take  ownership  of  the  same 

GHG emissions or emissions profile.  

Notes:   
i) Acceptable double counting occurs along the value chain where the lower emissions of a Solution are 
accounted for by a Carrier in their scope 1, and by the buying LSP in their scope 3 (category 4), and 
the LSP´s customer (Shipper) in their scope 3 (category 4). In this context, the various parties are 
reporting emissions associated with their activities. 

3.24  Emissions  Profile:  The  attributes  of  the  utilized  (i.e.,  combusted)  Solution,  including: 
lifecycle GHG emissions factors, total emissions, transportation activity where applicable, 
specific  emissions  profile  (e.g.,  IPCC  recognised  GHG  gases),  and/or  other  certified 
attributes. The emitter profile of a Solution or a LETS can be tracked separately from the 
supply chain profile of the Solution or LETS. 

3.25  Sustainability profile: The attributes of a Solution related to sustainability requirements, 
including:  origin,  life  cycle  GHG  emissions  factors,  feedstock,  production  process, 
volumetric energy density, lower heating value, applicable fuel batch ID data, and/or other 
certified attributes. 

Notes: 
i) Some sustainability profile documentation includes the emissions profile. 

                                                                                                                                                       8                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
3.26  Unit: Transferrable unit related to quantity of Solution/ LETS, its Emissions Profile, and the 

entitlement to a claim.  

Note: Other terms utilized by registries or system operators include ‘Book and Claim Unit’ (and derivatives 

thereof) and may refer to mass, volume, or quantity of associated GHG emissions. 

3.27  MBM Emissions Report: A standalone document where an organization discloses to its 
intended users the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with its logistics activities, 
following  a  market  based  approach  to  information  which  is  embedded  in  an  ISO  14083-
compliant Emissions Report. It can be prepared for the whole organization, or to one or a 
set  of  transportation/  hub  services.  It  provides  the  subject  matter  for  the  verification  or 
validation service. It is the source of the key information contained in a “certificate” that the 
Reporter may send to its customers. 

Notes: 
i) Clause 10 defines the minimum content for reporting MBM data.  

4.  General Accounting Principles 

The application of accounting principles is fundamental to ensuring that MBM-related information 
reported  is  a  true  and  fair  account  that  can  be  relied  upon  by  the  user  of  reported  data.  The 
principles given in this clause are the basis for and will guide the application of the monitoring 
and reporting requirements contained in this Specification. 

4.1  Relevance: The data and methodologies selected and reported shall be appropriate to the 

needs of the intended user of the reported data and information. 

4.2  Transparency:  The  Reporter  shall  disclose  sufficient  and  appropriate  MBM-related 
information to allow intended users of the reported data and information to make decisions 
with reasonable confidence. The Reporter shall document assumptions and justifications 
sufficiently to enable clarity of understanding of the basis on which disclosures are made. 

4.3  Completeness:  The  Reporter  shall  disclose  all  relevant  MBM-related  information 
necessary  for  transparent  reporting  in  line  with  the  specification.  The  Reporter  shall 
document all relevant information to support criteria and procedures for reporting. 

4.4  Accuracy: The Reporter shall reduce bias and uncertainties as far as practical. 

4.5  Consistency: The Report shall enable meaningful comparison of MBM-related information 

over time and between disclosures made on the same basis. 

4.6  Conservativeness: When assessing comparable alternative sources of data, information 
and methodology, the Reporter shall use a selection that is cautiously moderate and aims 
to ensure that disclosed information is not mis-stated. 

Notes:  
i)  Conservativeness  is  a  principle  used  to  choose  between  options  that  are  similar  in  terms  of  other 
principles such as completeness and accuracy. Conservativeness is interpreted differently depending on 
the circumstances of the monitoring and reporting and needs to be considered in the context of the intended 
user of the disclosed data and information. 

4.7  Best available data: When selecting existing data to support disclosures, the principles of 
completeness, accuracy and consistency shall be applied to ensure that the quality of the 
data used is fit for the purpose of disclosure to the intended user. The use of primary data 
is preferred over the use of secondary data wherever practicable. 

4.8 

Improvement over time: When defining methodologies to determine data and information 
for disclosure, changes over time may be applied provided that it results in an improvement 
in accuracy of the disclosure. 

                                                                                                                                                       9                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  Scope of Reporting 

The scope of reporting shall include the elements stated in this clause. 

5.1  A Report shall be the result of implementing the specifications for one of: 

a) a Solution Provider,  
b) a Shipper,  
c) a Logistics Services Provider (LSP), 
d) a Carrier. 

Where the Reporter is an organization that could be a combination of any of (a) to (d); the report 
should make clear in what capacity reporting is being done. 

5.2  This Report shall be either at the level of:  

a)  an  organization  (for  GHG  emissions  of  all  or  a  part  of  transportation  chains  operated 
and/or purchased by the organization, such as the annual sustainability report), or 
b)  transportation  or  hub  services  (for  GHG  emissions  of  a  set  of  transportation  or  hub 
services, reported by a service provider to a service user, such as a customer emissions 
report). 

Notes:  
i) See also clause 10.2.1 in relation to use of reported data by customers. 

5.3  The Report shall cover emissions profile and data for: 

a) one or more Solutions,  
b) one or more LETS, 
c) both (a) and (b). 

5.4  The Report shall cover a defined accounting period with a start date and an end date, which 

shall be disclosed. 

Notes: 
i) Example: yearly emissions report; customer emissions report for a specific transportation chain. 

6.  Quantification Approach 

The monitoring and reporting of MBM data shall include the quantification approaches stated in 
this clause. 

6.1  Sustainability  Profile.  If  the  sustainability/emissions  profile  of  the  Solution  identified  in 
clause 5.3 is established in line with the criteria of an existing certification system, list the 
name of the certification system. If no certification system is used, clause 6.1.2 is applicable. 

Notes: 
i) Existing certification systems include: ISCC, RSB, and future expanded certification systems. 
ii)  Clause  6.1.2  is  applicable  if  solution  has  been  certified,  but  actual  distribution  is  not  covered  by 
certification system (e.g., sustainability/emissions profile has been transferred to authorities as evidence 
for mandated bio-fuel distribution or subsidies). 

6.1.1 The separation of the physical Solution or LETS identified in clause 5.3 from the tracking of 
the  Solution  emissions  profile  or  LETS  emissions  profile,  as  well  as  how  the  Solution 
emissions profile or LETS emissions profile is recognized, transferred, and tracked, shall be 
documented. 

6.1.2 The system through which the transfer and tracking of the sustainability/emissions profile is 
done shall be transparent and verifiable. The system should be an independent third-party 
‘registry,’  or  an  ‘internal  ledger’  covered  by  an  independent  third-party  assessment.  An 
‘internal ledger’ can be outsourced to a second party. 

                                                                                                                                                       10                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
6.1.3 For reporting of a Solution, as a minimum the following parameters shall be tracked through 
the chain of custody system; the applicable parameter and units shall be documented: 
a) energy content, mass, and/or volume of the fuel. 
b) life cycle GHG emissions factor of the fuel. 
c)  feedstocks  (including  the  percentage  of  biogenic  material  in  the  feedstock,  where 
applicable) and production processes for the fuel, except in the case of a certified Solution 
where production processes may be omitted. 
For  non-certified  Solutions,  the  underlying  calculations,  data  sources  and  production 
processes shall be disclosed in the Report. 

Notes:  
i) the certificate for the Solution from a certification system conveys the required information. 

6.2  LETS characteristics minimum parameters. For reporting of a LETS, as a minimum the 
following parameters shall be tracked through the chain of custody system; the applicable 
parameter and units shall be disclosed in the Report: 
a) mode of transportation associated with the service, 
b) the amount of transportation activity conducted, 
c) the GHG emissions intensity of the LETS, 
d) the total GHG emissions resulting from the amount of transportation activity conducted, 
e) where applicable, the transportation operation category (TOC) of the service. 

6.2.1 For transparency reasons and to enable declarations to different stakeholders, information 
on the (fossil) baseline scenario as listed in clause 6.2 should also be reported and verified. 

6.3  Physically vs non-physically tied. The nature of a LETS identified under clause 5.3 shall 

be documented as either:  
a)  direct  generation  by  the  Reporter  using  a  'physically  tied'  Solution  and  using  the 
emissions profile of the actual fuel consumed in delivering the LETS. 
b) indirect generation by the Reporter using an emissions profile which is purchased for a 
'non-physically tied' Solution. 

6.3.1 Physical separation vs mass balance. For a LETS identified as applicable under clause 
6.3(a), this shall be demonstrated through documentation of the ownership/ operation of the 
fleet where the LETS was generated and, as applicable, documentation that the Solution 
utilized in generating the LETS was tracked through either: 
a) a physical separation chain of custody system; or 
b)  a  mass  balance  chain  of  custody  system,  where  the  boundary  of  the  system,  the 
description  of  the  chain  of  custody  model,  as  well  as  underlying  methods  and 
parameters  including  the  balancing  period  and  the  possibility  of  physical  presence 
shall be documented in the Monitoring Plan. 

6.3.2 Book  and  claim.  For  the  LETS  identified  as  applicable  under  clause  6.3(b),  this  shall  be 

demonstrated through: 
a) the use of a 'book and claim' chain of custody system; and  
b) documentation of the LETS generation point. 
Where  (a)  is  applied  and  a  TOC  is  used  for  reporting,  this  shall  be  documented.  The 
determination of the TOC shall comply with the approach detailed in ISO 14083 clause 6. 

                                                                                                                                                       11                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.3.3  Book and claim. For a LETS or multiple LETS, the nature of the 'book and claim' chain of 
custody system used shall be disclosed in the Report as one or more of: 

a) Solution provider: book solution to enable claims for indirect LETS generation 
b) Solution provider: provide solution directly to carrier to directly generate a LETS 
c) Shipper: direct claim 
d) Shipper: indirect claim 
e) Carrier: direct book 
f) Carrier: indirect book 
g) Carrier: claim and rebook 
h) LSP: indirect book 
i) LSP: direct claim and rebook 
j) LSP: indirect claim and rebook 
For (g),(i) and (j) the provenance of the LETS rebook shall be clearly documented. 

6.4  Primary and secondary data. To avoid erroneous double claiming of LETS profiles, where 
clause 10.2.1(b) is applicable, the Reporter may use the following data sources to determine 
GHG emissions information for customers that do not claim a LETS profile: 
a) primary data, 
b) secondary data. 
To ensure comparability, the same data sources should be used for quantifying the baseline 
and the LETS. 
Where  (a)  is  applicable,  this  shall  not  include  data  associated  with  a  LETS  claimed  by 
another customer. 
Where (b) is applicable, this shall use the most appropriate emissions intensity assigned to 
non-LETS activity. 

Notes: 
i) The terms primary data and secondary data, and how they are to be applied, are defined in ISO 14083. 
ii) Appropriate emissions intensities are included in ISO 14083 and the GLEC Framework. 

7.  Constraints 

The monitoring and reporting of MBM data shall apply the constraints stated in this clause: 

7.1  Modal Constraint. For reporting a LETS, the mode where the LETS was generated and 
where the LETS is being claimed shall be clearly documented. LETS shall not be claimed 
for a mode in which it was not generated. 

Notes: 
i) For example, LETS cannot be claimed for a maritime mode if it was generated in a road mode. 

                                                                                                                                                       12                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.2  Vintage  Constraint  -  profile  book  or  claim.  Constraints  applicable  to  vintage  of  LETS 
emissions profiles shall be assessed and documented, and one of the following shall be 
applied:  

a) Carrier: direct book - profile booked within 12 months of generation.  
b)  Carrier:  indirect  book  -  profile  booked  within  12  months  of  booking  of  profile  of  Solution 
associated  with  LETS  profile.  The  additionality  of  the  profile  shall  be  assessed  and 
documented in accordance with clause 7.5.  

c) Carrier: claim and rebook - profile re-booked within 12 months of booking of LETS that was 
claimed. The additionality of the profile shall be assessed and documented in accordance 
with clause 7.5. 

d) Carrier: direct or indirect claim - profile claimed and reported within 24 months of the year in 

which the LETS was booked.  

e) LSP: indirect book - profile booked within 12 months of booking of profile of Solution associated 
with  LETS  profile.  The  additionality  of  the  profile  shall  be  assessed  and  documented  in 
accordance with clause 7.5. 

f) LSP: direct claim and rebook - profile re-booked within 12 months of booking of LETS that was 

claimed. 

g) LSP: indirect claim and rebook - profile re-booked within 12 months of booking of LETS that 
was  claimed.  The  additionality  of  the  profile  shall  be  assessed  and  documented  in 
accordance with clause 7.5.  

h) LSP: direct or indirect claim - profile claimed and reported within 24 months of the year in which 
the LETS was booked.   
i) Shipper: direct claim - LETS profile included in shipper inventory within 24 months of the year 

of booking of LETS profile.  

j) Shipper: indirect claim - LETS profile included in shipper inventory within:  
     i) where claiming from a carrier or LSP: 24 months of year of booking of LETS profile,  
     ii) where claiming from a Solution Provider: 24 months of the year of booking of the Solution 
profile. The additionality of the profile shall be assessed and documented in accordance 
with clause 7.5  

k) Solution provider: provide direct – n/a.  
l)  Solution  provider:  indirect  claim  –  Solution  profile  booked  within  12 months  of  production  of 
solution. The additionality of the profile shall be assessed and documented in accordance 
with clause 7.5. 

Where  additionality  requirements  apply,  the  supplier  of  the  Solution  or  the  LETS  (Solution 
Provider, Carrier or LSP) shall disclose this in the MBM Emissions Report for transparency 
to the purchaser (claimant) of the LETS. 

7.3  Vintage Constraint - dates. For the application of clause 7.2 the following minimum data 

shall be documented: 
a) a brief description of the chain of custody model used,  
b) production date of the Solution, 
c) LETS generation date, 
d) the date the Solution or LETS was booked into the chain of custody system, 
e) the date the Solution or LETS was claimed from the chain of custody system, 
f) the date the Solution or LETS was reported.  

Notes: 
i) The 'Proof of Sustainability' (PoS) date can be regarded to be the production date of a low emissions 
Solution. As a result, a carrier or Solution provider has 12 months to book the low emissions Solution after 
the PoS date to meet the vintage constraints as defined in the MBM Framework and this Specification. 

                                                                                                                                                       13                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.4  Transportation  Activity  Constraint.  The  GHG  emissions  profile  of  a  LETS  shall  be 

determined for the organization’s activities by: 
a) determining the organization’s mode-specific transportation activity, 
b) determining for each mode-specific transportation activity either the: 
     i) energy consumption; or 
     ii) emissions intensity 
c) applying to the organization’s transportation activity, for either the LETS or Solution, the: 
     i) GHG emissions factor; or 
     ii) emissions intensity. 
The approach to determining (c) shall be in accordance with ISO 14083 clause 10 and shall 
be documented. 

7.5  Additionality  Constraint.  Where  the  MBM  Emissions  Report  includes  a  statement  on 
additionality  or  additionality  requirements  are  specified  in  clause  7.2,  additionality  status 
shall be assessed by: 
a)  determining  if  regulatory  requirements  apply  for  the  jurisdiction  where  the  Solution  is 
produced or the LETS generated in relation to either: 
     i) a particular action to be undertaken by the Solution Provider or the party that generates 

the LETS; or 

    ii) a specific outcome to be achieved by the Solution or the LETS. 
The assessment shall be documented including, as a minimum: 
b) the organization type, 
c) the mode where the LETS is created, 
d) the LETS Generation Point, 
e) the specific type of Solution used to generate the LETS, 
f) the justification for determining that additionality is fulfilled, including: 
     i) the regulations identified, 
     ii) if (a) is in place, why it is fulfilled in the Report's specific circumstances because the 

Solution or LETS goes beyond the requirements, 

     iii) any sources of evidence to support the proposed interpretation in (ii), 
g) any credits that may have aided the creation of the Solution, generation of the LETS, or 
credits for which the organization will apply for (with a note that no additional credits will be 
applied for). 

7.6  Additionality  Regulation  –  particular  action  or  specific  outcome.  Where  clause  7.5 
(a)(i) or (a)(ii) is applicable, the justification under clause 7.5(f) shall include documentation 
of how: 
a) the contribution of a specific LETS or Solution to the achievement of a required particular 
action or specific outcome cannot be quantified under the regulation; or  
B) how the LETS or Solution is not applied towards achieving the required action or outcome 
requirement. 

7.7  Cross-modal credit creation. Where clause 7.5 is applicable, the justification under clause 

7.5(f) shall include documentation of: 
a)  the  applicable  regulations  and  whether  those  regulations  allow  the  creation  of  cross-
modal credits, 
b) whether the Report includes application of this option, 
c) if (a) and (b) apply to the Report, the extent to which the Reporter for one mode generates 
credits towards requirements for another mode in the LETS covered by the Report. 
When those Solutions generate credits towards compliance with regulatory requirements 
for  another  mode  of  transportation,  the  Report  must  clearly  disclose  the  extent  to  which 
LETS they generate are based on a Solution that is used to meet compliance obligations 
for another mode of transportation. 

7.8  Erroneous double counting. The following topics shall be clearly documented: 

a) how the Reporter has checked and confirmed that there is no erroneous double counting 
of GHG emissions or emissions profile within the Solution or LETS subject to the Report or 
the associated calculation factors released to customers/ users, 
b) any contracts related to erroneous double counting activities within any part of a book 
and claim transaction. 

                                                                                                                                                       14                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.  Bundling/ Unbundling 

The  monitoring  and  reporting  of  MBM  data  shall  apply  the  bundling/  unbundling  requirements 
stated in this clause: 

8.1  Unbundling.  Where  unbundling  applies  to  a  transaction,  the  following  shall  be  clearly 

documented: 
a) unbundled booking or claiming is conducted in alignment with controls of booking and 
claiming in the MBM Framework listed by organization type.3 
b) direct/Indirect quality of the LETS. 
c) the splitting point of the emitter and supply chain emissions profiles identified in clause 
6.1.1. 
d)  disclosures  and  related  measures  utilized  (e.g.,  business  to  business  declaration)  to 
prevent erroneous double-counting. 
e) retirement of any emissions profile that is known or planned. 
f) registry utilized. 
g) registry rules regarding unbundling. 
h) status of, and active link to (if applicable), the other emissions profile (e.g., either the 
emitter  profile  or  the  supply  chain  profile,  whichever  was  the  other  from  the  original 
unbundling). 

8.2  Unbundling – error detection. Where unbundling applies to a transaction for an LSP and 
an error (upstream of and outside the responsibility and sphere of influence of the Reporter) 
has been identified by the Reporter, the following shall be clearly documented: 
a) data in clause 8.1. 
b) location, date, and parties involved in the error. 
c) date of learning there was an error. 
d) description of the error. 
e) resolution of the error including communication with and status of the conflicted profile 
that created the error. 

9.  Monitoring Plan 

The monitoring and reporting of MBM data shall be documented in a formal Monitoring Plan (often 
named a ‘Standard Operating Procedure’ or SOP) and associated procedure(s) and records, as 
stated in this clause: 

9.1  The Monitoring Plan for the specific Reporter and report type as stated in clause 5.2 shall 
include as a minimum the requirements for documentation stated in clauses (as applicable): 
5.1, 5.3, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 7.1, 7.4, 7.8, 8.1, 8.2 (including sub clauses as relevant). 

9.2  The Monitoring Plan shall include any potential omissions including a rationale. 

9.3  Where the following are applicable, a formal procedure documenting the approach shall be 
attached to the monitoring plan, and results of assessment retained in records as evidence: 
a) clause 7.1 requires an assessment of transportation mode, 
b) clause 7.2 requires an assessment of vintage, 
c) clause 7.4 requires an assessment of transportation activity, 
d) clause 7.5 requires an assessment of additionality. 

3 Please refer to the section “Principles to avoid incorrect double counting”, pages 50-54, MBM Framework (Oct. 2023).   

                                                                                                                                                       15                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
10.  Reporting 

Implementation of this specification shall lead to the establishment of a Report in accordance with 
the scope stated in clause 5 and including the elements that are required to be disclosed in the 
Report by clauses 10.1 and 10.2: 

10.1  The format of the disclosure Report shall follow either: 

a) the template published by SFC, or 
b) a format specified by the Reporter, provided that: 
     i) it contains the required minimum content of this Specification as stated in clause 10.2; 
     ii) it is documented in the Monitoring Plan; and 
     iii)  where  split  into  parts,  the  primary  part  of  the  Report  issued  shall  contain  clear 

signposts to where other parts are to be found. 

10.2  For the different types of reports specified in clause 5.2, the minimum information stated in 

this clause shall be clearly disclosed in the Report: 

10.2.1  Where  the  Report  applies  to  the  organizational  level,  the  Reporter  shall  make  clear 

whether one or both of the following apply: 
a) the emissions intensity presented in the Report reflects GHG calculations for allocation 
of  LETS  to  a  specific  user  or  users  and  is  not  applicable  for  use  in  customer-specific 
organizational GHG emissions calculations or, 
b)  the  emissions  intensity  presented  in  the  Report  reflects  GHG  calculations  for 
transportation activity that can be applied by customers of the Reporter for customer specific 
organizational GHG calculations. 
Where both (a) and (b) are applicable, it shall be transparently disclosed in the Report which 
intensity factor relates to which circumstance. 
Where  (b)  is  applicable,  the  emissions  intensity  shall  be  determined  in  accordance  with 
clause 6.4. 

10.2.2 Where the Report applies to the organizational level, that information has been provided 
differently  to  an  organization  that  is  using  the  emissions  profile  of  the  LETS  and  an 
organization that is not. 

10.2.3 Where the Report applies to the level of transportation or hub services the Reporter shall 

make clear whether: 
a) the emissions information is for an organization that is using the emissions profile of the 
LETS or, 
b) the emissions information is for an organization that is not using the emissions profile of 
the LETS. 
The LETS emissions intensity associated with (a) and (b) shall  be tracked and recorded 
transparently by the Reporter in its internal systems and the appropriate use of each LETS 
intensity value shall be documented. 

                                                                                                                                                       16                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.  Internal Controls and Data Retention 

Reporters shall have an internal control system and document retention process that ensures the 
information and data underpinning MBM disclosures in the Report are robust and able to support 
verification: 

11.1  Reporters  shall  have  an  internal  control  system  that  shall  comply  with  clause  8  of  ISO 
14064-1 on GHG inventory quality management, as applicable to MBM disclosures. 

11.2  Reporters  shall  retain  supporting  evidence  of  the  data  and  information  underpinning  the 

MBM disclosures for a minimum of five years. 

Notes: 
i) this is in case there is a dispute about disclosed data or the verification process. 
ii) supporting evidence includes, for example: 
   * calculation/ determination of data presented in the Report, 
   * documentation and records required by this Specification, as well as contractual or other records of 

transfers, registration, certification etc of Solutions and/or LETS, 

   * references such as sources of default values, 
   * external systems’ standard operating procedures. 

12.  Verification 

Verification of the Report referred to in clause 5 may be undertaken to provide transparency and 
confidence to the intended users of data disclosed in it. 

12.1  If the Reporter chooses to have its MBM Emissions Report verified, this must be carried out 
in line with the SFC CAS, and as a minimum shall include making available to the verifier: 
a) the draft Report, 
b) the relevant Monitoring Plan and any associated procedures and records required by this 
Specification, and all documents necessary to verify the disclosures made in the Report, 
c) all underlying evidence identified by the verifier as necessary to complete their work. 

12.2  If the Reporter chooses to have its MBM Emissions Report verified, the requirements for 
verification are specified in the VVB Manual - MBM Specification and shall be applied as 
applicable  to  the  criteria  set  out  in  this  Specification,  and  as  a  minimum  shall  include 
establishing: 
a) the objectives and type of Report to be verified, 
b) the level of assurance, 
c) the quantitative materiality threshold to be applied. 

Notes:  
i) Section 7 of the SFC CAS VVB Manual – ISO 14083 describes the activities associated with the planning 
of a verification, including the elements in this clause.  

                                                                                                                                                       17                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                       18                                                                                                                                                                                              

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
