Annual Report 2023

Moving from Announcement to Action

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

3

5

7

11

14

19

22

24

27

30

33

37

Contents

Introduction  

2023 in Numbers 

Mission, Vision, Goal 

Evolving Logistics Accounting  

Global Programs Decarbonizing the Freight Sector 

Regional Programs Decarbonzing the Freight Sector 

Academy - Educating Towards Zero Emissions  

Events and Engagements 

Publications and Releases 

Membership –Towards Achieving Carbon  
Reduction Goals  

People Driving Smart Freight Centre 

Financial Summary 

22

Academy - 
Educating Towards 
Zero Emissions 

5

13

Global Programs 
Decarbonizing 
the Freight Sector

2023 in numbers

24

37

Events and 
Engagements

Financial 
Summary

2

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Introduction

Since its inception in 2013 ten years ago, Smart Freight 
Centre (SFC) has focused on a single mission: the 
decarbonization of freight in collaboration with shippers, 
logistic service providers, and carriers end-to-end and 
across modes. 2023 has seen the conversion of the 
Global Logistics Emission Council (GLEC) framework for 
freight emissions accounting and reporting into a new ISO 
standard. What started as a small expert group a decade 
ago, has become mainstream. Road freight, maritime, 
and aviation sectors – referred to as “hard-to-abate” only 
a few years ago– have become engaged in designing 
roadmaps and frameworks for action. 

Shippers, Logistics Service Providers, and Carriers are 
taking responsibility for their scope 3 emissions and 
pushing for collaborative action, with Smart Freight 
Centre as the neutral platform. At the ten-year mark, 
SFC engaged in a strategic partnership with the Science-
Based Target Initiative (SBTi) – and recently with the 
Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP). While emission 
accounting and reporting are still the base for SFC, we 
have added modal initiatives on primary data sharing, 
giving cargo owners more visibility and choices on 
reducing their carbon footprint. And ultimately, SFC 
has stepped up its efforts to push partnerships for joint 
action, such as the “Fleet Electrification Coalition (FEC)”. 
The Fleet Electrification Coalition is one of three hot 
topics, on which SFC is currently focusing, in addition 
to Book & Claim and the SFC Data Exchange. Book 
& Claim, based on the “SFC Market-Based-Measures 
Emissions Accounting framework”, is a key building 

block towards scaling low-emission transport solutions, 
prominently in aviation but ultimately across modes. The 
SFC Data Exchange has matured from concept to an IT 
platform, spun out into a dedicated company to integrate 
emissions data from across the supply chain, in particular 
in road freight, into shipper carbon footprints under a 
trust protocol. Decarbonizing global supply chains has 
become mainstream, which everyone who joined for the 
2nd Smart Freight Week in April 2023 as one of more 
than 350 participants can confirm. SFC celebrated its 10-
year anniversary in August 2023 with a much larger team 
and broadened its global reach with a dedicated India 
program, an enlarged team in China, and a scoping effort 
in East Africa. By the end of 2023, our membership had 
surged to 134, with a growing number of engaged parties 
across all industry sectors in the pipeline. SFC launched 
its Clean Air Transport (CAT) program in 2023, initiated 
a Ro-Ro Maritime Community and relaunched its SFC 
Learning Centre as SFC Academy with new leadership 
and a new program. 

When we look forward, we see a shift in the global 
logistics sector “from announcement to action”. Member 
and funding growth is a promise and a show of trust in 
our organization. SFC is committed to delivering across 
all its programs and is grateful to our members and 
partners for their support, inspiration, and collaboration 
in impactful initiatives. We look forward to hearing your 
feedback and to deep collaboration where it counts. 

Christoph Wolff 
CEO Smart Freight Centre

Until the end of 2021, Christoph was a 

Member of the Executive Committee for the 

World Economic Forum, heading the Global 

Mobility platform that includes the Forum´s 

initiatives around sustainability and digitization 

in the supply chain, automotive and aviation 

industry. Before, he was Managing Director of 

the European Climate Foundation 2014-18, 

following 16 years at McKinsey as a Senior 

Partner. 

3

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

The transport 
sector is facing a 
challenge in meeting 
increased demand 
while reducing carbon 
dioxide emissions.

4

Smart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummaryContents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

2023 in Numbers

Logistics Industry 

Growing Impact

Training

According to the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC), the transport 
sector accounts for almost a quarter of 
global energy-related carbon dioxide 
(CO2) emission (23%).1 The transport 
sector is facing a challenge in meeting 
increased demand while reducing carbon 
dioxide emissions.2 

As part of Smart Freight Centre’s goal to 
achieve a zero-emission global logistics 
sector by 2050 or earlier, in accordance 
with 1.5° pathways, Smart Freight Centre 
has further strengthened its impact. 

23%

of the world’s energy-related CO2 
emissions are due to the transport 
sector.

1 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, [2022] 

‘Working Group III Contribution to the IPCC Sixth Assess-
ment Report’, Technical Summary page 68 of the report> 
accessed 27 June 2024.

2 International Transport Forum, [2023] ‘ITF Transport 
Outlook 2023: Summary’, page 8 of the summary> 
accessed 27 June 2024.

Today, freight transport accounts for 8% of global CO2 emissions. 

By 2050, direct CO2 emissions from logistics are set to rise by 

2050

42%.

2

New global programs added
Clean Air Transport and the Ship 
Recycling Transparency Initiative.

29

New members onboarded 
growing to a total of 134.

Total numbers of people trained

164
±35

14

Newly accredited tools  
calculating and reporting logistics GHG 
emissions against the industry standard.

Total number of companies trained

Through the two most renowned 
courses. Read more in Chapter 
‘Academy’.

1
2

Set up 1 regional office in India

New communities convened
Book & Claim and Fleet Electrification 
Coalition (FEC).

16

Publications (co-)launched  
See publications and releases

People and Culture

25

Total number of new joiners
2022: 15

47

21

26

Total Employees
2022: 22

5

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023 
 
Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

After a decade of 

shaping standards 
and aiding projects 
worldwide, Smart 
Freight Centre is 
evolving its strategy 
to tackle fresh 
challenges.

6

Smart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummaryContents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Vision, Mission, Goal
How Smart Freight Centre Advances Global Transformation

Smart Freight Centre is a globally active non-profit organization for climate action in the 
freight sector with the goal to mobilize the global logistics ecosystem, in particular its 
members and partners, in tracking and reducing its greenhouse gas emissions. 

Smart Freight Centre accelerates the reduction of logistics emissions to achieve a zero-
emission global logistics sector by 2050 or earlier, consistent with 1.5° pathways.

CO2

 

Our Vision
A zero-emission global logistics sector by 2050 or earlier, 
consistent with 1.5° pathways.

Our Mission
To accelerate the reduction of logistics emissions 
by fostering collaboration within the global logistics 
ecosystem.

Our Goal
Mobilize the global logistics ecosystem, in particular 
our members and partners, in tracking and reducing its 
greenhouse gas emissions to achieve 1.5° pathways.

Smart Freight Centre’s core strategies: 

By setting global standards 
for emission accounting 
in logistics and maintaining 
recognition as global authority 
to enable validation and 
impact/tracking



By facilitating emissions 
data exchange and 
establishing reference platforms 
at global scale to exchange 
emissions within and across 
transport modes, enabling low 
emission choices for shippers 
and tracking progress

By shaping and convening 
communities of practice 
of logistics practitioners 
at regional, sectorial, and 
functional level to exchange 
best practices, engage in 
programs to jointly set up 
decarbonization pathways and 
support advocacy for zero 
carbon solutions and policies

By creating and scaling 
capacity building programs 
within the logistics ecosystem 
in partnerships, with a focus 
to spread implementation of 
standards, foster collaboration, 
and support impact

By shaping collaborative 
initiatives for action, focusing 
on high impact scalable 
decarbonization levers, that 
require joint action across the 
logistics ecosystem

7

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023 
Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Examples per strategy 



Setting global standards for 
emission accounting 

Facilitating emissions data 
exchange 

Shaping and convening 
communities 

Creating and scaling 
capacity building programs 

Shaping collaborative 
initiatives for action

E.g the newly launched 
ISO14083 standard for which 
Smart Freight Centre’s Global 
Logistics Emissions Council 
(GLEC) Framework was the 
foundation. 

E.g. by spurring the inception 
and further growth of a Data 
Exchange company. 

E.g. the launch of the regional 
office in India and the Ship 
Recycling Transparency 
Initiative which was onboarded 
to Smart Freight Centre. 

E.g. by training people and 
companies through the Smart 
Freight Centre Academy 

E.g. by launching the Fleet 
Electrification Coalition. 

8

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023 
 
Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Global programs

Hosting

Regional offices and programs

GLEC is a program 

CAT is a program 

Clean Cargo is 

SFBA is an initiative 

SRTI is an initiative 

SFC China targets the increasing global GHG 

In May 2023, Smart 

focused on driving 

that leverages the 

a collaborative 

based on the 

in the form of a one-

emissions through ZEFI and SFSA.

Freight Centre opened 

widespread, 

transparency of GHG 

partnership focused 

collaboration of 

stop-shop platform 

transparent, and 

emissions from air 

on tracking and 

freight buyers who 

hosted by SFC which 

consistent calculation 

freight services to 

reducing GHG 

aim to shift towards 

utilizes transparency 

and reporting of 

push decarbonization 

emissions from 

zero-emissions freight 

to drive progress 

ZERO
ZERO
EMISSION
EMISSION
FREIGHT
FREIGHT
INITIATIVE
INITIATIVE

- - - - -

a new office in India, 

targeting one of the 

world’s largest freight 

markets to minimize 

GHG emissions. (The 

measures across the 

container shipping 

transport. 

on responsible ship 

SFSA is a group of 

ZEFI is a partnership 

C100 M25

climate impact.

GLEC Framework 

air transport sector.

and sharing (ocean 

recycling by reporting 

shippers working 

which engages 

C50  Y100 

was developed as a 

unified, international 

measurement and 

reporting standard.)

container freight 

decarbonization) best 

practices.

information on 

together towards 

various stakeholders 

policies.

creating a compliant, 

in the process of 

efficient, and 

accelerating China’s 

sustainable freight 

shift towards efficiency 

sector in China. 

and zero emission. 

Two key regional markets are being managed separately, 
being China and India. These markets are managed from 
local offices with the Smart Freight Shippers Alliance 
and Zero Emission Freight Initiatives being the leading 
programs in China.  

Smart Freight Centre is also the host of the Ship 
Recycling Transparency Initiative. SRTI was founded as 

a purpose-driven community with a focus on responsible 
recycling of ships and will keep its status as a unique 
group within SFC. 

Smart Freight Centre is a partner to many organizations, 
including World Resources Institute (WRI), WBCSD, 
The Climate Pledge (TCP), World Economic Forum, UC 
Davis, RMI, Global Maritime Forum (GMF), Roundtable 

for Sustainable Biomaterials (RSB), Climate & Clean 
Air Coalition, CALSTART, ETP-ALICE, Climate Group 
(EV100+), Transport & Environment, The International 
Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT), OECD, 
International Transport Forum and many more.

9

------Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023 
 
 
 
Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

International 
standards and 
unified approaches 
to decarbonize the 
freight sector.

10

Smart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummaryContents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Evolving logistics accounting

11

After a decade of shaping standards and aiding projects worldwide, SFC is evolving its strategy to tackle fresh challenges. This year’s landmark achievements include driving the development of an international standard for transport carbon emission accounting, ISO 14083. The new ISO standard, published in March 2023, was based on the principles Smart Freight Centre established with its members in the GLEC Framework as well as a pre-existing European standard (EN 16258). To facilitate the adoption of these standards, Smart Freight Centre offers training materials and courses on ISO 14083 implementation and on the GLEC Framework, as well as various other important topics in freight decarbonization. This initiative extends its support not only to members but also to practitioners, institutes, and associations. Learn more about our learning offering and activities in chapter ‘Academy’.  Taking a Book & Claim chain of custody approach In 2023, the Market Based Measures Accounting Framework (MBMA) was released by Smart Freight Centre to support voluntary, market-based transport decarbonization. The accounting framework is based on a “book and claim” chain of custody approach that permits a provider of freight transportation or of a freight decarbonization solution to allocate a low emission profile to the organizations that contribute to the emission abatement cost, even if those organizations’ freight is not always transported using a low emission solution or service. It also allows a purchaser of freight transportation to contribute to the cost premium of and report the greenhouse gas emission profile of a low emission transportation service, even if their freight was not physically transported on that low emission transportation service.Additionally, in partnership with the RMI, the Book & Claim community was launched in June 2023 to support stakeholders who are interested in fostering a high-integrity book and claim ecosystem. Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Conformity Assessment Scheme 

Primary data as a foundation

Smart Freight 
Assurance

Smart Freight Centre promoted assurance of sustainability 
reporting by shaping its Conformity Assessment Scheme 
(CAS) was launched in October 2023. The CAS holds a 
database of Verification Bodies that reporters can trust 
to carry out a competent, impartial verification service. In 
November, Verifavia was the first Verification Body to be 
approved by SFC under the CAS.

To increase stakeholder trust in the use of Book and 
Claim instruments, the Conformity Assessment Scheme is 
intended to cover market-based measures transactions, 
planned for the year 2024.

Smart Freight Centre emphasizes the importance of 
addressing the increasing regulation to internalize external 
costs and carbon accounting provisions globally and aims 
to provide a robust standard, similar to the International 
Financial Reporting Standards, to prevent market 
distortions and ensure credibility. 

As the demand for transparency grows, Smart Freight 
Centre emphasizes the need to balance data sharing with 
preserving business relationships and the integrity of its 
partners. The organization commits to fostering a trustful 
and open-minded environment, prioritizing common goals 
over individual business interests. By providing tools for 
accelerated adoption of sustainable measures, Smart 
Freight Centre aims to support its members in different 
sectors in achieving ambitious climate targets, creating an 
ecosystem of care and collaboration. 

The SFC Exchange Network facilitates emissions data 
exchange between actors in the transport logistics 
sector based on decentralized principles. A decentralized 
network for transparent and accurate data sharing is 
critical to overcoming the industry’s structural challenges 
in exchanging data on logistics emissions, including 
limited availability of primary data and difficulties 
accessing logistics emissions data.  

In 2023, the SFC Exchange Network progressed working 
towards the Stable Release v1.0, built upon a solid 
Proof of Concept foundation, showcasing the scalability 
and ease of deployment of the custom Application 
Programming Interface (API) technology. Leveraging 
API technology breaks down barriers to data exchange 

and accelerates collaboration across the industry. End 
of 2023, The SFC Exchange Network transitioned into 
a dedicated entity—Hermione. The mission of the new 
spin-off stands for full emissions transparency through 
strategic partnerships to offer industry compliant features 
on data collection, reporting and exchange that is 
scalable and tailored for various actors.  

Additionally, Smart Freight Centre launched an initiative 
- Project Integrating Logistics Emissions and Product 
Carbon Footprints (iLEAP) - aimed to facilitate emission 
transparency throughout the logistics supply chain, 
with a particular focus on assisting shippers in their 
decarbonization efforts. By gaining visibility into the 
logistics component of their product carbon footprint, 
shippers can make informed choices to reduce emissions 
and enhance sustainability. After the project launch during 
Smart Freight Week 2023, it was set out to improve the 
current logistics emissions data model. This led to the 
development of iLEAP’s technical specifications. The 
objective is to provide a first tested data model that can 
capture transport activity and emission data for logistics 
actors while being interoperable with the World Business 
Council for Sustainable Development’s data model by the 
end 2024. 

12

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

Through our 
global programs, 
we collaborate with 
our members and 
partners to address 
the needs of their 
respective sectors 
in accelerating the 
decarbonization 
journey.

13

Smart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummaryContents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Global Programs Decarbonizing the Freight Sector

Decarbonizing freight transport is critical in achieving the 
global goals of zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. 
Therefore, at Smart Freight Centre communities are 
conveyed through global and regional programs. These 
communities provide a space for members and partners 
to collaborate and find solutions which address the needs 
of their respective sectors, while developing ways to 
accelerate the decarbonization journey. 

Global Logistics Emissions Council 

Decarbonizing the Maritime Sector 

At the heart of Smart Freight Centre is the GLEC 
Framework which is the foundation of all other CO2 
emission calculation methods and newly released 
standards, including the new ISO 14083 standard as 
was launched in early 2023. In September 2023, Smart 
Freight Centre released an updated version of the GLEC 
Framework – GLEC Framework version 3.0 – which 
encompasses revisions resulting from new versions of 
source information, as well as recognizing the latest 
findings on higher emissions from fossil fuel production. 
The new version supports businesses in becoming ISO 
14083 compliant by translating ISO requirements into 
comprehensive language in an accessible, new interactive 
pdf format.  

Global 
Logistics
Emissions 
Council 
Framework

For logistics Emissions 

Accounting and Reporting V3.0

1

Smart Freight Centre has two programs in place 
convening maritime communities: Clean Cargo 
and the Ship Recycling Transparency Initiative. In 
addition, Clean Cargo is also hosting the Roll-on/
Roll-off Community.

14

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Clean Cargo

Ship Recycling Transparency Initiative

Roll on – Roll Off 
In addition to the ship recycling program, Clean Cargo is 
establishing dedicated communities for Roll-on/Roll-off 
(RoRo) and Break-Bulk shipping. 

In 2023, Smart Freight Centre declared that it is becoming 
the new host for the SRTI. The SRTI uses transparency 
to drive progress on responsible ship recycling by way of 
a one-stop shop online platform to report information on 
policies. 

In July 2023, the first ever methodology on harmonizing 
emissions in the Roll on Roll off segment was published. 
The methodology is aligned with existing international 
standards regarding carbon accounting for the logistics 
industry namely the GLEC Framework and ISO 14083.

This partnership facilitates collaboration amongst like-
minded partners and strengthens both Smart Freight 
Centre’s and SRTI’s joint efforts towards sustainable 
shipping. In 2023 the Initiative has seen a small 
contraction in its signatory base: while 3 new members 
joined, 7 members left (of which 4 were paying members). 
The SRTI has worked to rebuild momentum by redefining 
the program’s strategy together with granular work on its 
fundamental tools that prepared the new phase of this 
ambitious relaunch. 

Clean Cargo is a collaborative program between ocean 
container carriers, freight forwarders and cargo owners, 
focusing on tracking and reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions from ocean container shipping lines. 

In 2023, Clean Cargo expanded its community from 70 
to 106 members, an increase of over 50%, with 36 new 
members. 

The program also celebrated its 20-year anniversary 
during Smart Freight Week 2023, and held five Best 
Practice Sharing Sessions, including discussions 
on green and e-fuels with the World Bank and the 
International Transport Forum. 

In 2023, the port-to-port aggregation of greenhouse 
gas emissions (GHG) emissions intensity was approved 
and use in the Clean Cargo Data Integration Tool. Clean 
Cargo also published the Global Average GHG Emission 
Intensities report, based on data from 18 ocean container 
carriers with almost 4,100 vessels, representing 69% of 
the total cellular vessels. This report supports transparent 
tracking of the greenhouse gas emissions associated with 
ocean containerized cargo transportation. 

15

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023 
 
 
Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Decarbonizing Air Transport

Smart Freight Centre’s Clean Air Transport 
Program aims to support the decarbonization of air 
transportation. 

In May 2023, Smart Freight Centre announced and 
launched the Clean Air Transport program. This group, 
dedicated to decarbonizing the aviation sector, supports 

Sustainable Aviation Fuel implementation with a robust 
accounting framework. A strategic partnership with the 
International Air Transport Association (IATA) has been 
formed to coordinate sustainable aviation efforts. 

Since its announcement at Smart Freight Week in April 
and its official launch in May, the CAT Program reached 
a total number of close to 50 members by the end of 
the year, including a broad spectrum of globally active 
shippers, logistics service providers, airlines as well as 
fuel providers. Together with its committed members, 
the CAT team was able to first install a foundational 

program structure and in September 2023 kicked 
off a methodology workstream. Dedicated working 
groups were put in place to discuss topics like primary 
data sharing, Book & Claim principles, ISO compliant 
accounting practices and the reformation of an 
environmental, social and governance airline survey.

Important foundations for a strategic partnership between 
CAT and IATA were laid. Furthermore, a fruitful exchange 
between the CAT Program and the Book & Claim 
Community administrated by Smart Freight Centre and 
RMI was established.

Andrea Schoen participated in the Air Cargo Conference 2023 in 

Frankfurt

16

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Decarbonizing Road Freight 

Truck electrification is one of the most impactful strategies 
to decarbonize logistics. With existing incentives — fiscal 
incentives, road toll exemptions, and carbon pricing — 
e-trucks are already the most cost-effective solution for 
some use cases. Leading governments are setting clear 
regulatory standards that will accelerate zero-emission 
trucks, in particular in Europe and the U.S., spearheaded 
by California and other progressive states. These 
regulations will require that 30-45% of new truck sales be 
zero emissions by 2030 with a pathway to a full transition 
to zero-emission technologies in new vehicles by 2040. 

In September 2023, Smart Freight Centre launched the 
Fleet Electrification Coalition during Climate Week New 
York. This coalition is focused on leveraging demand 
aggregation as this is set to create clear visibility of 
demand to OEMs scale up e-truck production. The 
Fleet Electrification coalition has been established to 
drive sustainable practices in Europe and the U.S. and 
empowers companies to decarbonize their road freight 
operations faster through collective action. Its main 
objective is to enable 30% zero-emission truck sales by 
2030 and 100% by 2040 globally. The Fleet Electrification 
Coalition is a project from Smart Freight Centre’s 
Sustainable Freight Buyers Alliance, and partners closely 
with CALSTART in North America. 

The Road Freight Electrification Guidance works towards 
this goal by helping fleet owners and freight buyers to 
better understand where and when electrification should 
be applied, based on solid research, a tested decision-
making approach, and through real-life examples from 
around the world. In 2023, six webinars under the Road 
Freight Electrification Guidance project were hosted, 
to further build knowledge and skills for those industry 
stakeholder. 

Sustainable Freight Buyers Alliance

The Sustainable Freight Buyers Alliance (SFBA) unites 
corporate freight buyers to shift towards zero-emissions 
freight across all modes of transport in collaboration with 
their supply chains and partners.

SFBA reached 50+ members over the course of 2023. 
Together with Implement Consulting Group and with the 
support of First Movers Coalition, SFBA co-produced 
the first draft of the ‘Procurement Playbook: Toward Zero 
Emissions Logistics Services’, aimed at helping logistics 
professionals change their procurement operations to 
include sustainability practices. Furthermore, through 
conducting over 20 supply chain interviews across six 
different sectors, the team successfully identified three 
potential decarbonization solutions. 

SFBA’s presence was also felt in the field of policy, having 
organized information sessions of HDV CO2 legislation 
and CountEmissions EU, while raising awareness 
and gathering voices in support of stricter HDV CO2 
standards in Europe. As such, SFBA conducted 3 in 
person events, and 21 virtual workshops and meetings 
across workstreams, ranging from Fleet Electrification to 
Procurement.  

17

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

We continue 
to build regional 
communities in China 
and India, whilst 
exploring opportunities 
in East Africa to 
foster emission 
transparency.

18

Smart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummaryContents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Regional Programs Decarbonzing the Freight Sector

Decarbonizing freight in India

In Delhi, efforts are underway to boost road 
electrification for truck transport services in collaboration 
with governmental institutions to accelerate the 
decarbonization journey in India. 

In July 2023, the Smart Freight Centre India office was 
announced. With the official launch of the Smart Freight 
Centre India office, SFC took concrete steps towards 
emissions reduction in one of the world’s largest freight 
markets. This adds to a portfolio of global programs 
for ocean, road and air freight. Quickly after, the Green 
Freight Program for India was launched. 

Smart Freight Centre India convened the first successful 
“Shippers Roundtable” in May 2023 in partnership 

with World Resources Institute. Over 40 members and 
partners joined at India Habitat Centre. The event brought 
together stakeholders from government, industry, and 
academia to collaborate and accelerate the transition 
towards sustainable logistics.  

Smart Freight Centre India, as part of knowledge partner 
coalition for e-FAST, actively engaged with the Indian 
freight sector to establish the first demand signal of 7750 
zero emission trucks (ZETs), announced at CEM Goa. 
Smart Freight Centre India is leading on the demand 
aggregation and Finance pillars of the e-FAST platform, 
in alignment with knowledge partners working on other 
pillars, towards a collective goal of ZETs pilot rollout in 
2024. Aligned with the initiative Smart Freight Centre India 
was also part of the discussions held at the 28th session 
of the Conference of the Parties (COP) in December 2023 

regarding e-FAST: Paving the Way for Zero-Emission 
Freight in India.

Smart Freight Centre India also organized a successful 
second roundtable in Mumbai in November 2023, 
bringing together the Policy and Logistics Industry 
(Shippers, LSPs and Carriers) players to delve into the 
topic of freight decarbonization and expanding upon its 
various strategic levers, including emissions accounting, 
freight efficiencies and ZETs. Read more here.

Two Memoranda of Understanding have been signed with 
The Energy and Resources Institute and Indian Institutes 
of Management- Bengaluru, Smart Freight Centre India 
is collaborating with both on the development of national 
framework for freight emissions accounting with industry-
wide emissions intensity targets as per GLEC.  

Launch of Smart Freight Centre India 

19

Regional Programs Decarbonzing the Freight SectorContents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Decarbonizing freight in China

Following 10 years of close collaboration with the Chinese 
freight and logistic industry, Smart Freight Centre China is 
now an acknowledged influencer that sets the agenda for 
the industry to identify key challenges and opportunities in 
moving towards zero emissions and efficiency.

Smart Freight Centre China connected partners and 
promoted collaboration through its SFSA and Zero 

Decarbonizing freight in East Africa 

The community in Nairobi is piloting the production of 
green hydrogen to drive sustainable practices. Along 
with its strategic partners, Smart Freight Centre started a 
scoping study to launch a Green Freight Program in East 
Africa, with a key focus on transnational transit routes. 
Smart Freight Centre is also partnering with United 
Nations Environment Programme to update the Green 
Freight Strategy of one such major corridor: the Northern 
Corridor. 

As part of the Africa Climate Summit and Climate Week in 

Nairobi, Smart Freight Centre hosted an official side event on the 

role of the private sector in decarbonizing logistics and a half-day 

stakeholder consultation, co-hosted with the Kühne Foundation 

on the building blocks for a Green Freight Program in East Africa. 

Emissions Freight Initiative (ZEFI), including quarterly 
deep dive workshops regarding environmental protection 
and fiscal policies, hydrogen energy cost reduction and 
green finance contributing to the promotion of zero freight 
heavy-duty trucks. Smart Freight Centre China co-hosted 
the Zero Emission Medium and Heavy-Duty Commercial 
Vehicles Forum during the 2023 World New Energy 
Vehicle Congress to promote the global conversation and 
experience exchange between China, Europe, and U.S. 
Additionally, SFC China participated in the “Shenzhen-
Dongguan-Huizhou Heavy-duty Trucks Electrification 
Demonstration Project” and Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Zero 
Emissions Freight Corridor Demonstration Project”, 
bridging enabling factors and engaging with stakeholders 
to promote the application of zero emission freight 
vehicles in China.

To support the industry in starting to calculate carbon 
emissions, Smart Freight Centre introduced the GLEC 
Framework and ISO14083 standard to the Chinese 
market, including participation in the formulation of local 
industry standards, being the “Evaluation Index for Green 
Logistics of Logistics Enterprise” and “Requirements of 
Greenhouse Gas Emission Accounting and Reporting for 
Logistics Enterprise”. Smart Freight Centre China also 
developed a systematic training curriculum on Logistics 
Roadmap Training Project with teaching materials and 
guidelines for the Chinese market granted by the World 
Bank Global Environment Facility Project in China.

20

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

Gain industry-
leading insights 
and drive change in 
decarbonizing the 
logistics industry.

21

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Academy
Educating Towards Zero Emissions

The Smart Freight Centre Academy (previously known 
as the Smart Freight Learning Centre) is the knowledge 
and education hub of Smart Freight Centre. Quarter 1 
and quarter 2 of 2023 saw the successful rollout of the 
first cohorts of the Develop Your Sustainable Logistics 
Roadmap and GLEC & ISO 14083 Calculation Workshop. 

In late quarter 3 of 2023 a Head of Learning Centre (now 
Head of Academy) was onboarded. This represented a 
turning point for the Smart Freight Centre Academy as it 
is the first time there has been a dedicated strategic focus 
on the development, rollout and scaling up of the learning 
offering. 

Quarter 3 and quarter 4 of 2023 were dedicated to 
the rollout of cohort 2 of the Develop Your Sustainable 
Logistics Roadmap, as well as the GLEC & ISO 14083 
Calculation Workshop, and the development of the 
roadmap and strategy for the Academy to be rolled out 
in 2024. The year closed with the Academy focused 
on revamping the Introduction to the GLEC Framework 
self-paced e-learning to align with GLEC version 3 and 
the ISO Standard as well as the implementation of a new 
learning management system. 

Develop Your Sustainable  
Logistics Roadmap Training: 

Total numbers of people trained

75
±20

89
±15

Total numbers of people trained

Total number of companies trained

Total number of companies trained 

GLEC & ISO 14083 Calculation Workshop: 

22

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023 
Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

Engaging with the 

global community 
to build trust and 
awareness.

23

Smart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummaryContents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Events and engagements 2023 

In the year 2023, Smart Freight Centre ramped up its communication and engagement 
activities to further build its reputation as a trusted partner and raise awareness. 

• 

• 

• 

Increased our LinkedIn following from 4,150 at the beginning of Quarter 1 to 6,400 at 
the end of Quarter 4.
Increased the number of our newsletter subscribers from 3,000 individuals (December 
2022) to 3,900 subscribers in December 2023.
Increased the number of website visitors from 6,300 visitors in November 2022 to 
8,900 users in quarter 4 of 2023.

Smart Freight Centre also hosted several events and was invited to join panel discussions 
and speaking opportunities at global sustainability and logistics events. See some 
examples here. 

OCTOBER 31 - NOVEMBER 2 | GREENVILLE U.S.
Smart Freight Centre Fall meeting 
Over 90 of our SFC members came together for our first Fall Meeting. During three days, 
they discussed topics regarding Clean Cargo, Clean Air Transport, SFBA and FEC. This 
meeting was co-hosted by one of our members, Michelin.

APRIL 18-20 | AMSTERDAM
Smart Freight Week 2023
350+ participants being members and partners were hosted at Smart Freight Week in 
Amsterdam.

SEPTEMBER 17-24 | NEW YORK CITY
UN Climate Week   
Between September 17 and 24, Smart Freight Centre participated in Climate Week New 
York City. The Sustainable Freight Buyers Alliance, together with CALSTART, hosted a 
‘Fleet Electrification Coalition Session’ on September 20, discussing how stakeholders can 
accelerate the transition to electric trucks.

24

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

OCTOBER 11-12 | DUSSELDORF
Logistics Summit 
Smart Freight Centre’s head of Methods, Standards and Assurance, Kathrin Schuller, 
attending the Logistics Summit in Dusseldorf.

NOVEMBER 30 - DECEMBER 13 | UAE
28th Session of the Conference of the Parties   
The 28th session of the Conference of the Parties (COP28) was held in the United 
Arab Emirates between November 30 and December 13, 2023. Smart Freight Centre 
participated in the climate conversation by co-hosting and speaking at various events. To 
see our extensive work during COP28, you can go here.

OCTOBER 3-6 | BRUSSELS 
FIATA World Congress 
Smart Freight Centre’s Clean Air Transport Andrea Schoen participated in the Green 
Logistics Panel at the FIATA World Congress 2023 in Brussels.

25

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

Actively sharing, 

advocating and 
publishing news and 
knowledge with our 
external stakeholders.

26

Smart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummaryContents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Publications and Releases

Our Core strategies

 SETTING STANDARDS 

 CAPACITY BUILDING 

MARCH
Smart Freight Centre, CALSTART, and 
RVO. 2023. “Financing the Transition 
to Electric Trucks: Framing Paper 
for the Start of a Dialogue.” In 
Transforming Transportation 2023: 
Accelerating Toward Green and Inclusive 
Mobility.
To the framing paper >

JANUARY 18 | 2023 DAVOS
Smart Freight Centre and WBSCD 
released a new guidance titled “End-
to-End GHG Reporting of Logistics 
Operations” 
To the guidance >

 DATA EXCHANGE   CAPACITY BUILDING 

JANUARY
Data Exchange of GHG Emissions 
Guidelines providing an introduction 
on how to overcome the barriers to 
exchanging GHG related information 
across a supply chain.
To the guidance >

 Setting global standards for 
emission accounting 

 Facilitating emissions data exchange 

 Shaping and convening communities   

 Creating and scaling capacity 
building programs 

 Shaping collaborative initiatives for 
action 

 SETTING STANDARDS 

APRIL 25
Smart Freight Centre and the Science 
Based Targets initiative join forces 
to further drive transport sector 
decarbonization. 
To the news article >

 CONVENING COMMUNITIES 

JUNE 2
Book and Claim Community launches 
to accelerate climate solutions for heavy 
transport decarbonization.  
To the news article > 

 SETTING STANDARDS   COLLABORATIVE INITIATIVES 

JUNE 26 
Leading global companies advocate for 
higher CO2 standards for trucks in the 
European Union and EU Legislation.  
To the news article> 

 CAPACITY BUILDING 

JULY 
Technical University of Denmark and 
Smart Freight Centre. “Guidelines – 
Charging Infrastructure for Truck Depots.” 
European Copper Institute. 
To the guidelines >

27

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

 SETTING STANDARDS   CAPACITY BUILDING 

 SETTING STANDARDS   CAPACITY BUILDING 

DATA EXCHANGE 

COLLABORATIVE INITIATIVES 

DECEMBER 4, DUBAI COP28 
Global consortium of governments, 
industry and investors spearheads 
innovative investment strategy for zero-
emission vehicles.  
To the news article >

AUGUST 29
Founder Smart Freight Centre (Sophie 
Punte) interviewing Alan Lewis, Technical 
Director on Credible Accounting and 
Reporting for a Voluntary Carbon Market 
in the Freight Sector.
To the interview >

 CAPACITY BUILDING 

SEPTEMBER 14
Technical Manager Tharsis Teoh with 
“A fresh perspective on Road Freight 
Electrification”.  
To the article >

NOVEMBER 28
SFC Exchange Network announces its 
next phase by transitioning to a new 
dedicated company to scale impact, 
further catalyzing the shift towards 
emissions transparency and logistics 
decarbonization. 
To the news article >

 CAPACITY BUILDING    COLLABORATIVE INITIATIVES 

NOVEMBER 28 
Decarbonizing the Logistics Supply 
Chain: What’s on the Mind of Industry 
Leaders? At COP28, Pledge and Smart 
Freight Centre brought together leaders 
from global logistics to discuss the 
industry’s best routes to decarbonization. 
Here are ten insights from their discussion. 
To the article >

JULY 
Fuel Emission Factors in ISO 14083: 
A brief description of the derivation of 
emission factors.  
To the report >  

 COLLABORATIVE INITIATIVES 

JULY 20 
Companies unite to advance truck 
electrification in India and signal demand 
for at least 7700 electric freight vehicles 
by 2030.  
To the news article > 

 CAPACITY BUILDING 

AUGUST 17
Smart Freight Centre China released the 
first comprehensive assessment report 
on zero emission freight in China.  
To the report >

 COLLABORATIVE INITIATIVES 

SEPTEMBER 20 
Leading global companies unite to propel 
electric truck adoption in the United 
States and Europe and signal demand 
for more than 60,000 electric heavy duty 
trucks by 2030.  
To the news article >

28

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023 
Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

Being a member 

with Smart Freight 
Centre unlocks 
solutions.

29

Smart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummaryContents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Membership
Making impact through the SFC membership

Organizations on their journey to freight decarbonization 
can become a member of the Smart Freight Centre 
Community. Members have access to a wide portfolio 
of programs and initiatives to help them collaborate to 
improve their GHG emission performance and supply 
chain economics. Membership unlocks solutions through 
several global programs, including the Global Logistics 
Emission Council, Clean Cargo, Sustainable Freight 
Buyers Alliance, and Clean Air Transport.

Our two-tiered membership structure

Smart Freight Centre offers a two-tiered membership 
structure: Premium and Base.

•  Premium Members have access to SFBA and all the 

programs included in the Base membership.
•  Base Members have access to the GLEC, Clean 

Cargo and Clean Air Transport programs.

SFC Premium membership

SFC Base membership

30

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023 
Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

SFC Membership

In 2023, we accumulated the participating members’ emission reduction data for 
2022, leading to the following insights:

Number of SFC members reported 
GHG data 2022

GHG emissions coverage

4.2%

20 Shipper

2.7%

1.7%

Total members
2022: 105

54
Premium

134

80 
Base

18 Sea 
Carrier  

51

13 LSP

Representatives Membership

Absolute emissions reported 2022

Others 6%

39%  
Shippers

in million tonnes CO2e

20% Carriers

158 Sea 
Carrier  

66 Shipper

327

35% LSPs

103 LSP

Shippers

LSP

Sea carriers

1.0

million tonnes CO2e reduce from 
previous year

9.3

million tonnes CO2e reduced since 
2017

4-8%

Indication of industry coverage

31

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023 
Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

Driven, 

professional and 
collaborative – the 
people behind Smart 
Freight Centre are all 
propelled by a belief in 
what we do.

32

Smart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummaryContents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

People Driving Smart Freight Centre

Growth of People & Culture: 
The Heartbeat of Smart Freight 
Centre

Throughout 2023, the importance of 
People & Culture within Smart Freight 
Centre has grown at an unprecedented 
speed. This remarkable growth reflects 
the core belief that people are the most 
valuable asset driving forward Smart 
Freight Centre’s success. Smart Freight 
Centre’s commitment to fostering a 
thriving work environment has led to 
numerous initiatives aimed at nurturing 
talent, promoting well-being, and 
enhancing overall employee satisfaction.

Embracing Diversity, Equity, and 
Inclusion (DEI)

Looking Ahead

As Smart Freight Centre continues to 
evolve, the focus remains on building a 
culture that not only supports employees 
but also empowers them to reach their 
full potential. By investing in people and 
embracing DEI principles, Smart Freight 
Centre is shaped into a more dynamic 
and resilient organization but also 
contributes to a better, more inclusive 
future for all.

A key point of the People & Culture 
strategy is unwavering dedication to 
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI). 
A diverse workforce brings a wealth 
of perspectives, fostering innovation 
and creativity. By prioritizing equity, 
Smart Freight Centre ensures that 
every team member has access to 
the same opportunities for growth and 
development. Inclusion is the cornerstone 
of the company’s culture, creating a 
sense of belonging where everyone feels 
valued and heard.

Smart Freight Centre’s global team united in August 2023 to take stock on its strategy and further build engagement in the team during an offsite. 

People and Culture

25

Total number of new joiners
2022: 15

47

21

26

Total Employees
2022: 22

20

Total number of nationalities

33

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

SFC Management Team

Christoph Wolff

Mirjam Botman

Claire Skudder

Rik Arends

Andrea Schoen

Cristiano Façanha

Patric Pütz

Boyong Wang

CEO

Board

DIRECTOR OF FINANCE & 
OPERATIONS

DIRECTOR OF PEOPLE  
& CULTURE

DIRECTOR SUSTAINABLE 
FREIGHT BUYERS 
ALLIANCE 

DIRECTOR CLEAN 
CARGO AND CLEAN AIR 
TRANSPORT

DIRECTOR ROAD FREIGHT 
ELECTRIFICATION

TECHNICAL DIRECTOR

DIRECTOR SFC CHINA

Dick Benschop

Adrian Weiler 

FORMER PRESIDENT & 
CEO AT ROYAL SCHIPHOL 
GROUP

(CHAIRMAN), CEO, 
INFORM, GERMANY

Sophie Punte

FOUNDER, SMART 
FREIGHT CENTRE

Jose Viegas

CHAIRMAN OF THE 
ENVIRONMENT AND 
SUSTAINABILITY BOARD 
AT EDP, AND FORMER 
SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORT 
FORUM AT THE OECD

Ann Lee 
Carpenter

CEO AND CO-FOUNDER OF 
BRAID THEORY

Christoph Wolff

Jiangyan Wang

CEO, SMART FREIGHT 
CENTRE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF 
THE CHINA SUSTAINABLE 
TRANSPORTATION CENTER, 
CHINA

34

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

SFC Advisory Council

Smart Freight Centre’s Advisory Council 
consists of leading experts from academic 
institutions, international and commercial 
organizations to ensure that Smart Freight 
Centre’s activities are best positioned to 
accelerate and scale energy efficiency and 
emission reductions in the freight sector 
and strengthen other efforts to achieve this 
mission.

Alan McKinnon

Alison Clafin

Angie Farrag-Thibault

Claire Bryant

Ian Wainwright

Jari Kauppila

PROFESSOR OF 
LOGISTICS, KÜHNE 
LOGISTICS UNIVERSITY 

GLOBAL HEAD OF 
INTEGRATED SALES, A.P. 
MOLLER – MAERSK

ASSOCIATE VICE PRESIDENT 
GLOBAL TRANSPORTATION, 
ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE 
FUND

SUSTAINABILITY 
OPERATIONS LEADER, GE 
VERNOVA

INDEPENDENT 
CONSULTANT, FUTURE 
CITY LOGISTICS

HEAD OF SECRETARY 
GENERAL’S OFFICE AT ITF 
(INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORT 
FORUM) AND ASSOCIATE 
PROFESSOR AT TURKU 
SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

Jean Oberlé

AMAZON HEAD OF 
TRANSPORTATION 
PROCUREMENT – EU 
TRANSPORTATION 
DECARBONIZATION 

Jorge Tesler

Kathrin Brost

Laetitia Dablanc 

Mads Stensen

Margi Van Gogh

Nico De Golia

Pawan Mulukutla

PRESIDENT AND 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, 
TGI ARGENTINA

VICE PRESIDENT, 
GLOBAL HEAD OF 
GOGREEN PROGRAM, 
DHL FORWARDING

PROFESSOR AT THE 
UNIVERSITY GUSTAVE 
EIFFEL IN FRANCE

FORMER HEAD OF 
SUSTAINABILITY FOR 
KEY CLIENTS, MAERSK

HEAD - SUPPLY CHAIN, 
LOGISTICS & TRANSPORT 
INDUSTRIES, WORLD 
ECONOMIC FORUM

DIRECTOR OF CLOUD 
LOGISTICS SUSTAINABILITY, 
MICROSOFT

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR - 
INTEGRATED TRANSPORT, 
CLEAN AIR & HYDROGEN. 
SUSTAINABLE CITIES, WRI 
INDIA

Rasmus Valanko

Rob De Jong

Ruth Banomyong

Sandra Roling

Scott Childress

Sergio Barbarino

Suzanne Greene

Thomas Deloison

CHIEF PROGRAM OFFICER, 
WE MEAN BUSINESS 
COALITION

HEAD, SUSTAINABLE 
MOBILITY UNIT, UNEP

CHAIRMAN OF THE 
ADVISORY BOARD TO 
THE THAI MINISTER OF 
COMMERCE

FORMER DIRECTOR 
OF TRANSPORT, THE 
CLIMATE GROUP

PRESIDENT, UPS 
SUSTAINABILITY

SENIOR DIRECTOR - 
RESEARCH FELLOW, 
FABRIC & HOME CARE OPEN 
INNOVATION, PROCTER & 
GAMBLE

GLOBAL PURCHASING 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
SUSTAINABILITY DIRECTOR 
& SCOPE 3 CARBON SUBJECT 
MATTER  EXPERT, DOW

DIRECTOR MOBILITY, 
WBCSD (WORLD BUSINESS 
COUNCIL FOR SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT)

35

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

“

Transparency 
& accountability 
– detailing the 
responsible 
management of funds 
that support our 
mission and impact.

36

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial Summary

Financial Summary

Stichting Smart Freight Centre was established in 2013 as a global non-profit organization 
dedicated to a more efficient and zero-emissions global freight and logistics sector. SFC 
is registered in The Netherlands as a foundation, recognized as a Dutch Public Benefit 
Organization and is certified as an equivalent to a US public charity. To allow operation 
in China, SFC established Smart Freight Centre Asia Ltd, registered in Hong Kong, and 
Smart Freight Centre China as a Wholly Fully-Owned Enterprise, registered in Beijing. 
In 2021, SFC established Smart Freight Centre B.V. to continue providing training and 

services to the companies to increase impact but maintain the ANBI status of the 
foundation.
Smart Freight Centre received philanthropic funding from Hewlett Foundation, 
Trafigura Foundation, UPS Foundation, Energy Foundation China, We Mean Business 
Coalition, Shakti Foundation, CH Robinson Foundation, European Climate Foundation, 
ClimateWorks Foundation, the European Commission, Kühne Foundation, Climate and 
Clean Air Coalition, Climate Imperative.

Consolidated Balance Sheet
in €

31-12-23

31-12-22

Consolidated Income and Expenses
in €

2023

2022

Assets

Intangible fixed assets

Tangible fixed assets (equipment)

Financial assets

Current assets

Accounts receivable

Taxes and social secruty charges

397.765

2.009

Other receivables (prepayments and accrued income)

372.164

Cash and cash equivalents

Total

Liabilities

125.849

55.322

81.089

93,814

30,054

54,678

881,794

22,471

122,844

771.938

1.496.040

2.530.238

1,027,109

3,217,565

4,423,220

Income

Cost of sales

Gross Margin

Expenses

Employee expenses

 1.091.544 

Depreciation of intangible and tangible fixed assets

 54.422 

 692.844 

Other operating expenses

Total sum of expenses

Operating result

Other interest and similar income

Currency translation differences

Group equity (reserves and earmarked funds)

352.489

319.784

Financial income and expenses

 7.764.995 

 -5.873.961 

 3.598.237 

 -2.108.796 

 1.891.034

 1.489.441

 835.535 

 33.728 

 573.424 

 1.838.810 

 1.442.687 

 52.224 

 642 

 -14.565 

 -13.923 

 38.301 

 -2.085 

 36.216 

 46.754 

–

 4.457 

 4.457 

51,211

-3,171

48,040

Short-term liabilities (<1 year)

Account payable

Taxes and social premiums

Accruals and deferred income

Total

276.783

131.369

1.769.597

74,004

84,640

3,944,792

Result before tax

Income tax expense

Result

2.177.749

2.530.238

4,103,436

4,423,220

These numbers are currently undergoing an audit which will be finalized in July 2024. 
The official ANBI publication form can be found here.

37

Contents • Introduction • 2023 in Numbers • Mission, Vision, Goal • Evolving Logistics Accounting • Global Programs • Regional Programs • Academy • Events and Engagements • Publications and Releases • Membership • People Driving Smart Freight Centre • Financial SummarySmart Freight Centre Annual Report 2023Smart Freight Centre
Keizersgracht 560
1017 EM Amsterdam
https://smartfreightcentre.org

D
e
s
g
n
:

i

w
w
w
.
k
n
o
e

f
f
.
n

l

 
 
