SFC Exchange Network  
Stable Release 1.0 Report 

April 2024 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network 

Stable Release v 1.0 Report 
April 2024 

© Smart Freight Centre, 2024 
Suggested citation: Smart Freight Centre and Think-it. SFC Exchange Network—Stable Release v 1.0 Report. 2024. 
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in any form for educational or non-profit purposes without special permission from 
the copyright holder, provided acknowledgment of the source is made. Smart Freight Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of any 
publication that uses SFC Exchange Network as a source.  No use of this publication may be made for resale or for any other commercial 
purpose whatsoever, without prior permission in writing from Smart Freight Centre. 

Disclaimer 
The views expressed in this publication are those of Smart Freight Centre and staff, consultants and management, and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the Board of Trustees of Smart Freight Centre.  Smart Freight Centre does not guarantee the accuracy of the data 
included in this publication and does not accept responsibility for consequence of their use. 

Acknowledgements 

This report was written by Tuul Erdenebold of Smart Freight Centre.  

Technology Partner 

Participants and contributors 

About Smart Freight Centre 
Smart Freight Centre is an international non-profit organization focused on reducing greenhouse gas emissions from freight transportation. 
Smart Freight Centre’s vision is an efficient and zero emission global logistics sector. Smart Freight Centre’s mission is to collaborate with 
the organization’s global partners to quantify impacts, identify solutions, and propagate logistics decarbonization strategies. Smart Freight 
Centre’s  goal  is  to  guide  the  global  logistics  industry  in  tracking  and  reducing  the  industry’s  greenhouse gas  emissions by  one  billion 
tonnes by 2030 and to reach zero emissions by 2050 or earlier, consistent with a 1.5°C future. 

Contact 
Smart Freight Centre 
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Stable Release 1.0 Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Executive Summary 

The  SFC  Exchange  Network  is  a  sociotechnical  project  creating  and  proving  the  feasibility  of  a 
decentralized data exchange for capturing logistics GHG emissions. Transparency over GHG emissions is 
fundamental to the decarbonization of logistics, as it informs business decisions and can optimize logistics 
operations. This requires access to reliable data from supply chain operations. Data is both an opportunity 
and a necessity to extract information and operationalize into valuable insights that will be key towards full 
emissions  transparency.  Specifically,  within  the  logistics  industry,  there  are  known  structural  challenges 
from  data  gaps,  lack  of  interoperability  between  various  IT  systems  and  reluctancy  to  share  data  often 
considered as business sensitive.  

The SFC Exchange Network aims to address these issues by supporting organizations progress towards 
acquiring reliable data and facilitate a peer-to-peer exchange. It is a succession project following previous 
SFC led projects, Data Access project and the End-to-End Guidance, based on the need of organizations 
to access reliable data whilst promoting data sharing collaboration efforts. It also integrates the data model 
proposed  within  the  iLEAP  project.  The  vision  of  SFC  Exchange  Network  is  to  create  full  emissions 
transparency and catalyze decarbonization within transport chains based on decentralized principles.  

Decentralized  data  exchanges  are  based  on  the  concept  of  dataspaces  in  which  secure,  open  and 
seamless  data  sharing  is  enabled.  This  allows  for  an  efficient  yet  sovereign  way  to  share  data  as  the 
dataspace stakeholders govern the ecosystem in which they co-create and abide by. Such an ecosystem 
benefits from varied representation of logistics actors as it relies heavily on collaboration and accordance 
to demarcate the ‘playbook’ of how the data exchange is done. 

The SFC Exchange Network project began in late 2022. Since then, the project has undergone two phases, 
Proof-of-Concept  (PoC)  and  Stable  Release  v  1.0.  The  PoC  covered  governance,  technology,  and 
assurance  workstreams  for  the  SFC  Exchange  Network.  The  workstreams  are  crucial  in  which  the 
sociotechnical nature of the project is fortified.  

After  the  PoC  phase,  an  interim  phase  of  Stable  Release  v  1.0  kicked  off  with  focus  on  technology 
improvements to demonstrate the feasibility of the technology at scale. These improvements would be the 
cornerstone of a scalable and a stable solution. The Stable Release v 1.0 phase concluded with a testing 
period  in  February  2024  with  a  larger  scope.  This  report  delves  into  Stable  Release  v  1.0  technology 
improvements and outlines key takeaways. 

In November 2023, Smart Freight Centre made an announcement in which the SFC Exchange Network is 
transitioning to a purpose driven organization in order to scale the project with the required expertise and 
resources. The dedicated organization will become a for-profit for-good venture with the necessary know-
how to establish a long-term vision. 

April 2024 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Stable Release 1.0 Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Contents 

1    Introduction ............................................................................................................... 5 

1.1  Background .................................................................................................................... 5 

1.2  Stable Release v 1.0 ...................................................................................................... 5 

2  Technology ............................................................................................................... 6 

3  Testing and Deployment .......................................................................................... 7 

3.1 

Infrastructure choices ................................................................................................... 7 

3.2  Results ............................................................................................................................ 7 

3.3  Lessons Learned ........................................................................................................... 7 

Next Steps ....................................................................................................................... 8 

April 2024 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Stable Release 1.0 Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

1 

Introduction 

1.1  Background 

The  Smart  Freight  Centre  has  been  involved  in 
data and digitalization related projects since 2019. 
The  Data  Access  project  and  the  End-to-End 
guidance are a couple of exemplary projects which 
defined  the  importance  of  a  standardized  data 
model  and  the  parameters  required  to  ease  the 
interoperability between different IT systems. The 
projects were vital preliminary work to set the stage 
for  the  SFC  Exchange  Network  to  flourish  by 
means of participatory pilots. 

The SFC Exchange Network is a project dedicated 
to  proving  the  feasibility  of  decentralized  data 
exchange. The objective is to reduce logistics data 
gaps  by  promoting  standardized  semantics, 
improve interoperability between siloed IT systems 
trust  and  commitment  between 
and  boost 
stakeholders.  Accessing  reliable  data  goes  in 
tandem  with  the  state  of  digitalization  of  an 
organization  both  internally  and  externally.  This 
means without the refinement of either, a desirable 
outcome  will  not  be  easily  achieved.  Hence  data 
and  digitalization  are  in  conjunction  with  one 
another. 

The SFC Exchange Network officially kicked-off in 
October 2022. The initial launch period defined the 
scope  of  decentralized  peer-to-peer  exchange. 
From this focal point, the project kicked-off its PoC 
phase  from  February  2023  to  June  2023.  The 
deliverables 
participatory 
included  multiple 
workshops, exploratory research on requirements 
and a technical prototype. The technical prototype 
was  fundamental  to  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of 
peer-to-peer  exchange,  willingness  to  share  data 
and technical implementation. The SFC Exchange 
Network  is  the  first  Smart  Freight  Centre  project 
with  a  product  deliverable  being  a  technical 
prototype as an output.  

1.2  Stable Release v 1.0  

Following the success of the PoC, an interim phase 
of  Stable  Release  v  1.0  began.  This  phase  was 
marked by an improved technical first iteration that 
is stable and scalable. The initial work of the interim 
phase  was  to  formulate  the  PoC  feedback  into 
improvements  with  a  strong  strategic  direction. 
This required the interim phase to be divided into 
two  parts:  PoC  evaluation  and 
scaling 
preparations. 

of 

The  first  part,  PoC  evaluation,  was  to  dissect 
collected  feedback  from  the  participants.  This 
dictated  the  focus  of  PoC  evaluation  to  be  the 
grounding  work 
brainstorm 
consisting 
discussions,  revision  sessions,  and  planning. 
Taking  in  the  feedback  as  the  core  guide,  it  was 
important to translate the input into a working vision 
and match it to the capacity of operating teams—
SFC  and  Think-it.  Think-it  is  an  instrumental 
technology  partner  and  led  the  IT  development. 
The vision and the capacity were dually integrated 
so that the most viable project approach was taken.  

Based  on  the  outcomes  of  the  primary  part,  PoC 
evaluation,  it  was  evident  to  strategize  on  the 
technology improvements for Stable Release v 1.0 
and  demonstrate  its  feasibility.  In  parallel,  a 
governance structure was proposed and discussed 
extensively  to  set  up  an  organization  ready  to 
scale. The subject of assurance was decided to be 
deprioritized within this phase. 

in 

the 

scaling 

the  project 

Hence,  the  second  part  of  the  interim  phase  of 
Stable Release v 1.0 was the scaling preparations. 
This also explains the title Stable Release v 1.0, as 
technology 
stability  and  scalability  of 
is 
readiness  and 
instrumental 
competitiveness.  The 
preparations 
concentrated  on  technology  development  and 
extensive  documentation  creation  to  support  the 
overall comprehensibility of the project as well as 
to  empower  participants  take  ownership  in  the 
process.  Therefore,  the  goal  of  the  phase  was  to 
improve the technology to ensure a Stable Release 
v 1.0 is ready and set out a governance structure 
that is ready for scaling. 

April 2024 

5 

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Stable Release 1.0 Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

2  Technology 

share 40,000 lines of data, which was capped but 
could have been scaled further.  

The  improvements  in  the  technology  include  key 
work around improving the data model, enhancing 
the  technical  features  and  functionalities,  and 
the  onboarding  and  deployment 
streamlining 
experience.  Firstly,  it  was  evident  to  improve  the 
data  model  according  to  the  collected  feedback 
from  PoC.  The  data  semantics  model  utilized 
during the PoC consisted of 13 data variables. For 
Stable  Release  v  1.0,  the  data  model  was 
expanded  to  32  data  variables.  The  increased 
number  of  data  variables  reflected  use  case  1  of 
improving  accuracy  of  reported  emissions.  Using 
the  data  model  allowed  participants  to  organize 
and  structure 
in  accordance  with 
standardized semantics model which is based on 
the GLEC Framework and the iLEAP project. This 
improvement also came with a change in the data 
grouping  requirement.  During  the  PoC,  the  data 
shared  by 
‘data  providers’  was  grouped  by 
shipments  whilst  in  Stable  Release  v  1.0—it  is 
grouped  by  month.  This  allows 
for  multiple 
shipments to be shared based on a chosen month 
and  enables  higher  amounts  of  data  to  be 
exchanged.  The  exchange  of  data  on  a  monthly 
basis is also closer to operational reality.  

their  data 

rules  were  embedded  within 

Furthermore,  data  model  compliance  and 
validation 
the 
technology. The technical prototype’s API enforces 
these  rules  linking  the  enhancement  of  technical 
features  and  functionalities.  For  example,  the 
content  of  data  shared  would  need  to  adhere  to 
data model validation rules and if it did not follow—
there would be error messages stating the rows of 
data that needed to be corrected. This immediately 
pointed  to  the  very  rows  easing  the  overall  data 
exchange process and enforcing data quality. The 
API was further worked upon which made up most 
of the developments for the technical features and 
functionalities. The improved API is apparent from 
the  capability  of  handling  and  sharing  higher 
volume of data. During the PoC participants were 
able to share less than 10 lines of data whereas in 
Stable  Release  v  1.0—participants  were  able  to 

The  final  area  of  focus  for  the  technological 
improvement was the streamlined onboarding and 
deployment  experience  to  the  SFC  Exchange 
Network.  Although  this  is  not  a  purely  technical 
work,  the  creation  and  design  of  documentation 
was essential in fostering a project that is scalable 
and  stable.  Learning  from  the  PoC,  to  set-up 
participants  for  success  is  to  ensure  a  smooth 
onboarding  process.  Therefore,  Stable  Release 
v1.0 offered an extensive onboarding package with 
numerous  documents  with  the  goal  to  ensure 
participants have a good grasp of the project and 
completed  all  necessary  preliminary  steps.  This 
also allowed the participants to identify the required 
right  profiles  as  active 
resources  with 
engagement and efforts are necessary to carry out 
the  project  successfully.  Helping  participants  find 
the  right  team  was  a  particular  focus  of  the 
onboarding package which stemmed from the PoC 
phase. As much efforts and flexibility the operating 
teams of the project offered, it would not amount to 
the 
the 
participants.  Additionally 
technical  documents, 
specifically  helpful  for  the  testing  period,  was 
provided  with  the  intention  for  it  to  be  more 
simplified and digestible. 

involvement  and  engagement 

from 

the 

In addition to the documents, numerous workshops 
took place to gauge participants’ understanding on 
the  project  as  well  as  co-shape  to  progress 
together. For instance, the use case workshop was 
conducted to inform participants about use case 1 
on improving accuracy of reported emissions and 
determine  associated  key  performance  indicators 
together. Use cases are important to the objective 
of SFC Exchange Network as they are participant 
driven  and  capture  the  value  proposition  of  the 
project  to  address  realistic  problems  within  the 
industry.  Simultaneously,  the  key  performance 
indicators are targets which measure the extent of 
the attainment.  

April 2024 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Stable Release 1.0 Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

3  Testing and 
Deployment 

The  aim  of  Stable  Release  v  1.0  testing  was  to 
prove  that  the  technology  is  scalable,  easy  to 
deploy and fulfills key objectives of the project. The 
testing period was the second time the technology 
was  tested  and  validated  since  the  inception  of 
SFC Exchange Network. The testing would assess 
the  resiliency  of  the  system  and  its  updated 
technical  features  amongst  four  testing  goals: 
assess 
reliability;  prove 
business  value  and  gather  feedback.  The  goals 
were crafted with the notion that feedback loop is 
instrumental  in  inspecting  and  evaluating  the 
technology. Thus, participants were encouraged to 
complete  the  testing  autonomously  to  enable  the 
participants to “own” the technology and simulate a 
potential scenario in which the technology can be 
adopted and integrated within their IT systems.   

functionality;  assess 

3.1 

Infrastructure choices 

In  terms  of  infrastructure  choices,  participants 
could  choose  between  deploying  on  SFC 
infrastructure as a managed service or in their own 
cloud  environment.  The 
first  option  of  SFC 
infrastructure can be considered as Software as a 
Service (SaaS) in which the deployment is handled 
fully  by  Think-it 
thereby  providing  automatic 
configuration  and  ease.  The  second  option  of 
deployment on own environment is cloud agnostic 
meaning  the  technology  can  run  on  any  cloud 
infrastructure—in  this  case  the  deployment  takes 
place  on  participants’  own  infrastructure.  This 
offers flexibility and customization for participants. 
There  was  a  step-by-step  Deployment  Guide 
provided to facilitate participants to self-deploy and 
truly utilize the technology for its intended purpose 
of sovereignty, scalability, and stability.   

3.2  Results  

There were six companies partaking in the project 
as  participants  resulting 
four  pairs.  One 
participating  company,  in  the  role  of  a  ‘data 
consumer’  was  paired  with  two  of  its  carriers. 

in 

Another participant acted both as a ‘data provider’ 
and 
‘data  consumer’  exchanging  data  by 
themselves  across  potential  business  units.  The 
data  exchange  between  a  ‘data  provider’  and  a 
‘data  consumer’  is  solely  contingent  upon  the 
contractual relationship between the parties. Such 
a  trusted  relationship  attests  to  the  ‘playbook’  of 
how the exchange is done based on the user who 
permitted  authorization  and  in  turn  the  user  who 
has the authorization to access the data.  

the 

technology  and  exchange  data. 

In terms of deployment, SFC infrastructure was the 
final choice of infrastructure for all participants. In 
general,  majority  of  the  participants  were  able  to 
use 
In 
comparison  with  the  PoC  testing  journey,  Stable 
Release  v  1.0  testing  was  marked  by  greater 
autonomy  from  the  participants.  Any  potential 
blockers  and 
the 
participants with thorough details which allowed for 
addressing them quickly and efficiently resulting in 
a smooth testing process.   

issues  were 

reported  by 

3.3  Lessons Learned 

Overall,  the  improved  Stable  Release  of  the  API 
was  well  received  and  functioned  in  line  with  the 
requirements  set  out.  However,  the  following 
improvements could be considered: 

time 

All the deployments were completed utilizing SFC 
infrastructure. Unfortunately, the participants which 
opted for deployment on their own chose to switch 
to  SFC  infrastructure  due  to  rigorous  internal 
limitations. 
cybersecurity  policies  and 
Consequently,  checking  on  other 
IT  and 
cybersecurity  policies  in  place  is  an  important 
prerequisite before diving deeper into the project. 
Not only will the duration be potentially lengthy but 
also  every  company  follows  different  protocols 
therefore  the  varying  procedures  may  require 
additional  efforts.  Moreover,  decision  making  will 
require  coordination  and  availability  of 
the 
stakeholders with authority.  

Despite extended timelines, the project participants 
were not able to deploy on own environment due to 
capacity constraints in their IT departments. Hence 

April 2024 

7 

 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Stable Release 1.0 Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

cross-department onboarding is important. Taking 
this  into  account,  the  further  scaling  of  the  SFC 
Exchange  Network  recognizes  the  need  to  think 
holistically  whilst  relying  on  active  participation 
from  the  participants.  This  requires  a  design 
thinking  approach  yet  keeping  an  equilibrium 
between customization and collective strategy will 
need to be prioritized and addressed. 

Another  aspect  to  the  testing  was  the  supporting 
documents  that  were  created  and  sent  out  to 
streamline 
the  onboarding  and  deployment 
experience.  Such  documents  turned  out  to  be 
the  hands-on 
straight-forward  demonstrating 
approach  of  the  testing.  Aside  from  testing,  an 
evaluation  survey  was  created  to  assess  the 
testing  experience  and  gain  insights  on  the 
project’s progression and trajectory. Despite only a 
few fill-outs, the feedback from the survey pointed 
to data model compliance and validation rules to be 
helpful in the testing and strengthened the overall 
future, 
functionalities. 
features  and 
participants  would  like  to  be  able  to  share  even 
higher amounts of data—within the millions range 
rather  than  being  restricted  by  40,000.  Another 
highly  requested  feature  was  user  interface  and 
front-end  design  which  eases  the  interaction  with 
the technology.  

the 

In 

scale-up  and  advance  the  decentral  technology. 
The  new  organization,  with  a  neutral  trusted 
governance  structure,  will  build  on  the  SFC 
Exchange Network and is designed to scale-up in 
an accelerated manner and help logistics industry 
actors address their most urgent challenges.  

The spin-off is already underway, focusing on the 
ability 
to  exchange  with  small  and  medium 
enterprises and between logistics actors. As stable 
release v 1.0 was the next iteration after the PoC, 
there  are  promising  outcomes  given  proper 
identification  and  prioritization  of  focus  areas.    A 
couple of the most pressing challenges include the 
versatility in IT systems resulting in siloed data as 
well  as  lack  of  access  to  primary  data.  The 
dedicated company will lead the logistics industry 
with the collaboration of external partners with the 
mission to facilitate end-to-end emissions data.  

Smart  Freight  Centre  will  maintain  its  role  as  a 
steering  guide  for  the  future  of  SFC  Exchange 
Network  as  well  as  advocate  for  the  overall 
industry.  This 
alignment  within 
requires 
the 
polishing 
to  ensure  checks  and 
governance  structure 
balances  of  representation  between 
logistics 
stakeholders.  

logistics 
and 

strengthening 

the 

All  in  all,  participants  can  resonate  with  the 
business  value  proposition  of  the  project,  and  it 
mostly 
organization’s 
decarbonization pursuits.  

aligns  with 

their 

Next Steps  

Based on the results from Stable Release v 1.0, it 
is  indicative  the  SFC  Exchange  Network  can 
provide  a  valuable  infrastructure  to  decentral 
exchange. However, for the technology to succeed 
it requires to be scaled to participate and work with 
all  logistics  actors,  including  the  freight  buyers, 
service providers, and carriers.  

Due  to  the  required  need  to  scale,  the  SFC 
Exchange  Network  will  transition  to  a  dedicated 
purpose  driven  organization,  with  the  mission  to 

Additionally  utilizing  the  know-how  of  the  GLEC 
community, Smart Freight Centre will continuously 
push  for  and  establish  industry  consensus  for 
primary  data  adoption  and  accounting  guidance, 
including 
interoperable  data 
models  and  a  universal  structure  for  logistics 
emissions.  

the  provision  of 

facilitate  end-to-end 

A forthcoming step for the organization is to shape 
the solution on need basis in the form of use cases 
-  increasing  access  for  primary  data  for  SME 
logistics 
solutions  and 
emissions 
transparency.  The  SFC  Exchange 
Network  is  an  ever-evolving,  agile  project  that  is 
participatory  and  is  now  in  pursuit  under  the  new 
organization  to  become  the  de-facto  industry 
emissions exchange. 

April 2024 

8 

 
 
 
Join our journey towards 

efficient and zero-emission 

global freight and logistics 

Contact 
Smart Freight Centre 
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 
Amsterdam, Netherlands 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 
Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
