SUMMARY REPORT 

SEMINAR CUM WORKSHOP - ACCELERATING LOW EMISSION LOGISTICS IN INDIA 

12th June 2024/ India Habitat Centre, New Delhi 

ABOUT SMART FREIGHT CENTRE 

Smart Freight Centre launched the SFC India program in May 2023 as a regional initiative in South Asia, 

in cognizance of the role of the region in the global ecosystem development for low-emission logistics. 

The program aims to collaborate with the Indian freight sector on its mission to track and reduce global 

GHG emissions by 1 billion tonnes by 2030 and reach Net Zero by 2050. SFC is involved in various freight 

decarbonization  initiatives  in  India,  including   NITI  Aayog’s  e-FAST,  and  is  deeply  engaged  with  key 

stakeholders of the Indian Freight ecosystem, key Central Government offices, Industry and Ecosystem 

stakeholders to align on collaborative action for the advancement of Freight Electrification in India.  

Smart  Freight  Centre  is  also  supporting  the  Ministry  of  Heavy  Industries,  Government  of  India  on  the 

development of an e-Truck Ecosystem development roadmap, as part of a recently notified e-Mobility 

Task Force. Additionally, SFC is working on a sub-national policy framework for ZET adoption in India, 

along  with  a  few  related  activities  on  ZET  solutions.  The  ultimate  goal  is  to  drive  large-scale  e-truck 

adoption through short/medium-term pilot projects, delivered in collaboration with stakeholders from 

both the demand and supply sides of India's freight ecosystem. 

Furthermore,  Smart  Freight  Centre  is  collaborating  with  TERI  And  IIM  Bangalore  to  develop  Freight 

Emissions Accounting guidelines for India, leveraging its global credentials and expertise on the topic, 

established  via  the  GLEC  (Global  Logistics  Emissions  Council)  framework.  GLEC  is  an  emissions 

accounting  framework  developed  by  Smart  Freight  Centre  in  2014,  in  close  with  the  global  freight 

ecosystem  which  is  now  recognized  as  an  Industry  standard  and  is  also  the  basis  of  the  ISO14083 

standard. 

SEMINAR OVERVIEW 

The advent of Zero Emission Trucks (ZETs), or eTrucks, marks a pivotal shift in India’s road freight sector, 

traditionally dominated by diesel trucks. With their zero tailpipe emissions and favorable TCO (Total Cost 

of  Ownership)  economics,  ZETs  are  poised  to  capitalize  on  the  burgeoning  investments  in  India’s 

logistics growth, steering the industry toward a sustainable, low-emission future in alignment with net-

zero objectives. 

The  Indian  Freight  Buyers  and  Logistics  Service  Providers  (LSPs)  are  increasingly  gravitating  towards 

ZETs,  driven  by  a  heightened  commitment  to  sustainability  and  the  tangible  business  benefits  these 

vehicles  offer.  This  growing  interest  has  received  robust  support  from  various  government  initiatives, 

1 

 
 
 
notably  NITI  Aayog’s  e-FAST  program,  which  champions  a  comprehensive  approach  to  accelerating 

freight electrification. e-FAST India (Electric Freight Accelerator for Sustainable Transport – India) has 

been instrumental in devising strategies and actions that spur the adoption of electric freight, with an 

expanding network of partnerships that includes OEMs, shippers, and Think Tanks, further solidifying its 

collaborative framework. 

Recognizing the critical role of finance in the commercial viability of ZETs, there is a pressing need for 

innovative  financing  models  that  surmount  the  prevailing  challenges.  Concurrently,  efforts  to 

standardize  freight  emissions  accounting  framework  in  India  are  underway,  promising  to  significantly 

reduce emissions via efficiency improvements and reduce fuel import reliance. 

Smart  Freight  Centre,  in  continuation  to  earlier  stakeholder  engagement  and  consultations  for  the 

development of ecosystem strategy for ZET deployment at scale, organised a workshop on ‘Accelerating 

Low  Emission  Logistics  in  India’  in  Delhi  on  12th  June.  The  day-long  workshop  brought  together  key 

stakeholders from the Indian freight ecosystem, including shippers, LSPs, financial institutions, OEMs, 

and policymakers, focusing on: 

1.  Opportunities and Strategic Lever for accelerating ZET adoption in India 

2.  Emission Accounting for Low Emission Logistics 

3.  Financing for ZETs 

OBJECTIVE 

The  seminar  aimed  to  build  upon  the  robust  industry  interest  showcased  at  CEM  Goa’s  inaugural 

demand signal event, pinpointing ZET deployment prospects across diverse sectors and applications. 

The discussions forged actionable strategies for actualizing the freight electrification vision. Experts also 

delved  into  the  nuances  of  freight  emissions  accounting—a  vital  precursor  to  acknowledging  the 

imperative for freight electrification with an assessment of the present freight emission scenario—and 

investigated pioneering models designed to overcome the financial hurdles impeding ZET adoption. 

SUMMARY 

Smart Freight Centre (SFC) opened the workshop by welcoming all partners and participants including 

senior officials from Niti Ayog, MHI, DPIIT, and representatives from SIDBI(Small Industries Development 

Bank  of  India),  AITWA(All  India  Transport  Welfare  Association),  CESL(Convergence  Energy  Services 

Limited), TERI, IIM Bangalore, e-FAST, Shakti Foundation along with other senior executives from Freight 

Industry, Allied sectors, and Knowledge partner organisations.  

Dr.  Christoph  Wolff,  CEO,  Smart  Freight  Centre  (SFC),  outlined  the  workshop’s  objective  in  line  with 

SFC's vision to decarbonize global freight and stated the intent on assisting the international and national 

2 

 
 
shippers, cargo owners, together with the LSPs and the fleet providers in decarbonizing their operations. 

Sudhendu  J  Sinha,  Advisor,  Infra  Connectivity  &  Electric  Mobility  Niti  Ayog  in  their  special  address 

mentioned that approximately four million trucks currently running on the roads of India, are responsible 

for spewing out 80% of greenhouse gas emissions from road transport, and thereby emphasized on the 

urgency of addressing greenhouse gas emissions. 

Further,  a  Memorandum  of  understanding  was  exchanged  between  SIDBI  and  Smart  Freight  Centre 

(SFC), asserting confidence and unwavering ecosystem support for the vision of sustainable logistics via 

low-emission freight in India. The signed MoU between SIDBI and SFC outlines a strategic objective to 

systemically  identify  and  address  financing  as  a  key  challenge  hindering  the  widespread  adoption  of 

electric trucks. It is expected that SIDBI’s extensive experience in promoting and financing small and 

medium  enterprises  and  networking  with  other  financial  institutions(public  and  private)  coupled  with 

SFCs'  strong  Industry  engagement  and  freight  decarbonization  credentials  will  facilitate  the 

development  of  a  blended  finance  model  based  on  affordable  financing  options  for  fleet  operators 

interested in electric truck transition. 

Another  partnership  announced  at  the  event  was  an  MoU  between  IIM  Bangalore  and  SFC  on  the 

development of an emission accounting framework for India, with IIM Bangalore supporting the creation 

of the data framework, under the wider mandate of Emissions Accounting Framework development. This 

initiative is currently undertaken as a collaborative exercise between SFC, TERI and IIM Bangalore. The 

developed Emissions Accounting Framework will further be supported with disclosure guidelines, data 

management, and governance framework, and a focused capacity development exercise covering all 

technical  and  operations  pillars  of  emissions  accounting  for  freight  operations  in  India,  to  enable 

industry-wide adoption of the established framework. 

TERI, along with Smart Freight Centre, Shakti Sustainable, IIM Bangalore, and SIDBI also launched the 

report “Baseline Study for Non-Urban Road Transport in India”. The report includes an assessment of 

the  non-urban  HDV  goods  sector  in  the  Indian  context  and  establishes  the  importance  of  estimating 

baseline emissions for long-distance road freight transport operators, specific energy consumption, and 

distance-based specific energy consumption for truck operators or carriers. 

PANEL DISCUSSION: DETAILS AND TAKEAWAYS 

Plenary Session 1: Opportunities for ZET Deployment 

3 

 
 
 
 
The session focused on India’s e-FAST, a NITI (Government of India) initiative and India’s first platform 

facilitating  collaboration  between  government  stakeholders  and  private  sector  players  to  shape 

strategies to create a conducive environment for freight electrification.  

Moderator: 

•  Christoph Wolff - CEO, Smart Freight Centre 

Panel members: 

•  Sudhendu J Sinha – Advisor, Infra Connectivity & Electric Mobility, NITI Aayog 

•  E. Srinivas – Joint Secretary, Ministry of Commerce & Industries (Logistics Division) 

•  Sumit Kumar – Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industries 

•  Pradeep Singhal – Chairman, All India Transporters Welfare Association (AITWA) 

•  Captain  Prashant  S.  Widge  -  Head  of  Public  Affairs,  South  Asia,  Group  Public  and  Regulatory 

Affairs, AP Moller – Maersk 

Session Objectives 

•  Emphasize the primary areas and applications that could benefit from the adoption of E-trucks, 

citing advantageous business cases and operational adaptability. 

• 

Identify key impediments preventing shippers from moving forward with scaled ZET rollout.  

•  Assess  the  potential  impact  of  the  transition  to  electric  trucks  on  the  existing  Indian  logistics 

market in terms of achieving sustainable logistics goals 

•  Leverage logistics infrastructure push for electrification of highway corridors to support E-Trucks 

movement in medium and long-haul applications. 

•  Engage the industry in developing the e-truck ecosystem, with government support measures to 

boost private sector contribution. 

• 

• 

Interests  of  the  Indian  fleet  operators  in  transitioning  to  E-trucks,  as  well  as  measures  from 

policymakers, shippers, and financial institutions to help the trucking sector  

Identification of potential models that may have the potential to serve as a foundation for early 

e-truck deployment in India.  

Key takeaways 

•  Three broad levers that can be applied to make freight activities more environment friendly with 

less CO2 emission footprint, 

ü  Avoid the need for energy and thus the CO2 emissions 

ü  Shift towards a more sustainable mode of transport  

4 

 
 
ü  Efficiency  improvements  to  again  decarbonize  or  reduce  the  CO2  footprint  in  front  of 

freight operations 

•  About 70% of all freight in India is moved by road, with heavy-duty trucks carrying 76% of the 

freight  and  medium-duty  trucks  carrying  21%.  Combined,  medium-  and  heavy-duty  trucks 

handle a staggering 97% of all freight movement in India. 

•  A transition across the board in terms of value drivers is the need of the hour. Transitioning from 

an expensive logistics mode to a less expensive logistics mode, from a polluting transport mode 

to a much lesser or cleaner transport mode will result to deliver the required result. 

•  Three value cases which are of interest in ZET deployment are -   

ü  Environmental case in terms of CO2 reductions  

ü  Economical case in terms of energy savings and thus reducing the energy import 

ü  Social value case that can be captured by this kind of transition 

•  There is a need for the identification of corridors for Hydrogen as well as LNG-fuelled vehicles, 

alongside a focus on the development of ZET corridors. The hub and spoke model are another 

alternative that can be identified as a self-sufficient model for ZET deployment. 

• 

It is necessary to map the domestic market's supply chain and get a clear understanding of the 

commodities that are being traded throughout it.  

•  The electrification of railroads has already received substantial funding, and by December 2024, 

all railroads will be fully electrified. Therefore, the model share that will be available on the roads 

and railroads at the same time needs to be accurately assessed.  

•  Government  intervention  needs  to  come  in  through  a  comprehensive  energy  and  investment 

plan. If a particular green corridor needs to be developed, there is a requirement for planning for 

charging stations and significant investments need to go into manufacturing of E-trucks. 

•  There  are  10  million  trucks  on  the  road  out  of  which  1-2  million  run  on  the  long  route  with  a 

national  permit  and  are  plying  inter-city  and  inter-state.  Seven  corridors  have  been  identified 

where  70%  of  the  business  happens.  So  based  on  these  factors,  deployment  of  10000  ZETs 

seems highly possible. 

•  The  ZET  industry  will  be  in  direct  competition  with  the  railways  as  the  stated  policy  of  the 

government is that freight movement through railways is to be promoted over road transport. 

• 

In India, 70% of the market is owned by small fleet operators. It is being observed that recently 

there  has  been  a  shift  from  single  truck  owners  to  large  fleet  owners.  Development  of  a 

framework  on  how  Cooperatives  of  different  truck  owner  categories  can  be  promoted,  as  a 

means to support small fleet operation on asset financing aspect. 

5 

 
 
Plenary Session 2: Strategic Levers for ZET Deployment at Scale 

While EVs in India have witnessed strong market growth since the GOI launched the two FAME schemes 

(2015  and  2019)  and  followed  it  up  with  the  PLI  scheme  for  Battery  manufacturing,  the  spotlight  has 

largely been confined to E-2W, e-3W and e-4W (passenger). Zero Emission Trucks (ZETs) have not found 

enough traction due to unclear demand signals, low tech maturity amongst Indian truck manufacturers, 

and inadequate policy focus despite the climate action potential with recognition of freight activities as 

a key contributor to an entity’s ESG performance via Scope 3 emissions.  

While Shipper's interest in ZETs with their ESG focus and initial demonstrated success of e-LCVs in last-

mile delivery services has established a strong case for other freight use cases and haulage (medium 

and long) categories getting electrified lately, concentrated efforts toward ecosystem development for 

scaled ZET deployment projects is required to drive actual deployment on the group, with a scalability 

potential.  This  session  focused  on  strategies  for  ZET  deployment  at  scale,  with  a  focus  on  specific 

barriers across finance, technology, operations, and policy. 

Moderator: 

•  Chetna Nagpal - Senior Associate, RMI 

Panel members: 

•  Dr R K Singh - CGM, Green Climate Finance, SIDBI 

•  Amit Sood – Head, Commercial/ e-trucks, Convergence Energy Services Ltd. 

•  Sanjay Bajpai – Executive Director, CONCOR 

•  Yashpal Sachar – VP Corporate Affairs, Ashok Leyland 

•  Neha Nagpal Grover - International Finance Corporation (IFC)  

Session Objectives 

•  To Identify financing as a strategic lever in ZET (e-trucks) market development in India which will 

de-risk investments and improve the business case for ZETs in India 

•  Demand aggregation and joint procurements as tools to accelerate ZET adoption, particularly 

given the fragmented Industry structure, dominated by private players 

•  Applicability of ZETs across commodity types and sectors from a use case perspective 

•  Existing  technology  is  an  important  barrier  in  moving  towards  a  low-emissions  logistics 

paradigm, particularly from a performance and reliability standpoint 

•  High  upfront  cost  as  a  key  hurdle  for  e-truck  adoption,  estimate  of  a  realistic  timeline  for 

convergence of ICE and E-trucks in terms of price parity, and key factors driving the same. 

Key Takeaways 

6 

 
 
•  The  two  main  obstacles  that  needs  to  be  overcome  includes  high  acquisition  cost,  and  the 

residual value, which arises after the conclusion of asset ownership.  Both the factors have a 

significant role in determining the TCO, which in turn affects the viability of the business.  

•  The bankability is integral from a lender's perspective whether it is a multilateral or a commercial 

lender or development institution. One of the primary ways of addressing bankability is working 

on solutions such as demand aggregation. Demand aggregation models have been tested in the 

EV buses space in India and have also been tested even in the trucking space in international 

markets, and therefore, can be used as reference models for building a framework. 

•  The most important factors contributing to a successful ZET deployment strategy are - 

ü 

Identification of the most feasible financing scheme and understanding of the feasibility 

and applicability of various financing models 

ü  A scale-up approach, i.e., initiating from a smaller deployment to expanding to a larger 

deployment 

ü  Establishing a robust risk-mitigating model  

ü  Formation of a communication platform between various actors to synergize efforts 

•  One  of  the  primary  areas  where  government  intervention  is  warranted  is  the  mitigation  of 

obsolescence risk, whether through accelerated depreciation or other strategies. Governmental 

intervention can solve one of the primary risk issues, which is the residual remaining value of the 

electric vehicle trucks. It's possible that the development of hydrogen or other technologies will 

render this industry obsolete in five or ten years.  

•  Deploying  of  E-trucks  depends  heavily  on  the  availability  and  feasibility  of  longer  duration 

contracts, since the initial cost is higher, Op-Ex will depend upon the running of the trucks.  

•  Any logistical issues pertaining to loading or unloading must be fixed. It must be the case that the 

truck is either running or meant to be charging. Therefore, a vehicle should never be idle, even 

with the proper shift timings. If it remains inactive, the duration will undoubtedly lengthen, and 

the economy will be undermined. 

• 

It's difficult to set up the infrastructure for charging. Obtaining a connection and acquiring the 

load has gotten easier in recent years when viewed through the prism of ease of doing business. 

Still,  it's  a  challenge,  and  a  lot  of  users  are  still  having  difficulty  with  it.  According  to  such  a 

perspective, effective policy is necessary before the government intervenes.  

• 

It is important to implement a pilot project on the ground, to derive a practical understanding of 

the ground situation. Without the learnings from a pilot project, past mistakes will probably be 

repeated.  

7 

 
 
•  Electric mobility is meant to be profitable because it uses less energy. Although the total cost of 

ownership  may  be  high,  the  cost  per  kilometer  is  essentially  lower  than  that  of  gasoline  and 

diesel.  If,  after  ten  years,  the  infrastructure  for  mobility  has  not  shown  to  be  profitable,  then 

something is wrong. 

•  Analysis  of  the  previous  10-year  expenditure  on  infrastructure  development  for  EVs  and 

consequent utilisation (<3-5%) is not very encouraging for further investments. The break-even 

period with this level of utilization to 45 to 60 years and thus does not support the business case 

for ZET charging infrastructure on the highways. 

•  For the period 2030-35, investments in the scale of approximately 325 to 355 billion USD will be 

required to achieve Net-zero emission targets. These two targets are the first two objectives of 

the  2070  decarbonization  target.  If  a  proper  instrument  of  utilisation  and  framework  is  not 

developed, then opting for other models such as PPP may have to be considered. 

•  Focus needs to be on increasing the credit affordability of our banks to explore and support green 

projects. Without a proper financing model, ZET deployment will be difficult to initiate. 

• 

It is recognized that upfront cost will continue to act as a barrier and as such, subsidy schemes 

as  incentives  from  the  Government  cannot  be  a  feasible  solution  in  the  long  term  due  to  its 

cascading impacts on the economy.  

•  Policy  initiatives  to  bring  the  upfront  as  well  as  running  cost  of  ZETs  down  through  efficiency 

improvements, technology enhancements, and economies of scale need to be prioritized. 

Breakout Session 1: Financing for ZET Deployment 

Indian  Freight  Industry  has  signaled  a  strong  interest  in  the  adoption  of  Electric  Trucks  with  the 

aggregated  demand  of  7750  Trucks  under  NITI  Aayog’s  e-FAST  initiative.  Further  development  of  the 

demand  signal  has  indicated  a  strong  potential  of  translating  the  same  into  immediate  wins  with  6-7 

scalable pilots of initial 40-50 ZETs each, with a use case pivot and on selected corridors, over the next 

two years, until 2025.  

The  implementation  of  these  pilots  will  however  require  all  ecosystem  nodes  to  be  activated  to  lend 

necessary support for making them viable as a fundable project. One of the key barriers and a critical 

attribute defining the Business viability of these pilots is the availability of finance and the cost of capital 

specific  to  each  use  case.  Considering  that  the  Indian  freight  sector  is  highly  fragmented  with  a  vast 

majority  of  carriers  (fleet  operators)  with  small-scale  enterprise  profiles  with  less  than  5  trucks 

ownership, it makes the financing of e-truck as an asset even more challenging due to high asset cost 

along with low financial appetite and credit worthiness of prospective owners. This session focused on 

8 

 
 
deliberating key financial issues hampering the deployment of ZETs and exploring different models for 

mitigating the same via presentation on the topic, following by a Panel Discussion on the topic. 

Moderator 

•  Vijay Jaiswal - Director, SFC India 

Panel members 

•  Mr. Rajiv Kumar - General Manager, SIDBI 

•  Mr. Pramod Sharma - President, Corporate Affairs, SUN Mobility 

•  Mr. Jayant Prasad - Executive Director, Ckers Finance 

•  Mr. Nishant Idnani - Founder & Managing Director, Vaultus Green Funding 

Session Objectives 

•  Expand  on  high  ownership  cost  and  TCO  gaps  as  per  present  asset  utilization  scenarios  and 

service contract arrangements. 

•  Highlight  key  components  of  commercial  viability  gaps  for  ZET  adoption  to  be  addressed  by 

Financial Institutions 

•  Government support to address the viability gap and learning from e-BUS transition program 

•  Explore potential ownership models given fragmented structure of the Freight Sector, with small-

scale fleet operators as the dominant majority in the carrier pool 

•  Bring in important learning from Internal ZET financing programs and service models 

Key takeaways 

•  The major challenge for ZET adoption at scale will be the Capex at almost or more than double in 

case of e-trucks. Financing will be the key thing as far as the e-trucking is concerned. 

•  MDV and HDV segments are growing exponentially and will be the case also in the future from 

the perspective of transitioning to electric trucks. The CAGR currently as per trend is at 2.81% 

and  even  with  that,  almost  1  million  new  truck  sales  can  be  estimated  in  2050.  This  will 

approximately put 17 million trucks on the road by 2050 which will be 4X from current numbers. 

•  Study on contracting arrangement for medium and heavy-duty trucks in India suggest that while 

10%  is  captive  use,  the  fixed  contract  comprises  of  30%  while  majority  60%  is  still  reliant  on 

transport service providers.  

•  From the financing model perspective self-funded are roughly at 2% while finance with state or 

private banks is at 15% with maximum borrowers relying on financing with NBFCs . 

•  An alternative model can be truck leasing or hire purchase which tends to be more cost-effective 

and provides flexibility and, particularly beneficial for upgradation of trucks on a regular basis. 

9 

 
 
•  Resale  risk  for  electric  trucks  is  significantly  higher  than  ICE  trucks  with  no  established 

secondary market. A mature market for second-life batteries will allay the risk significantly. 

•  Performance risk again is considered higher for e-truck in the current scenario as compared to 

ICE. Similarly, operation risk and infrastructure risk are considerably higher for electric trucks 

while the loan customer risk profile would probably stay the same apart from the differential in 

the upfront capex which is required. 

•  For  financing  longer  duration  of  borrowing  is  required  and  that  will  only  be  ensured  once  the 

operational years or the contracts which is being given to the fleet owners are more. 

•  Models for the financing of ZET deployment can be worked based on the financing models for E-

buses. For instance, the GCC model gross cost contract has a longer period duration of around 

10 to 12 years where the OEM/Operator needs to come up with a complete solution. 

• 

In the railway industry, the IRFC and NBFC lease assets to the Ministry of Railways for a period of 

thirty years. During the first fifteen years, the IRFC recovers the principal and interest, and for the 

remaining fifteen years, the Ministry of Railways pays the IRFC a minimum rent. After 30 years, 

they charge the nominal price and transfer the assets to the Minister of Railways. This improved 

the business flow of capital and business risk in railroads while also lowering the upfront risk of 

putting  the  asset  on  the  track.  This  funding  model  can  serve  as  a  guide  for  developing  a 

deployment plan akin to that of e-trucks. 

•  The subsidies offered as part of FAME-I and FAME-II triggered a lot of interest and have brought 

the market to a certain level of maturity where it becomes self-sustainable. Similar support from 

the government can drastically shorten the transition time to an eco-development perspective. 

•  There are huge opportunities in ZET ownership, but at the same time there are challenges and 

barriers. Hence, large scale financing is not happening, this is where the role of a Development 

Financial Institution like SIDBI exists. 

•  A significant portion of the result depends on how the asset is being utilised and the manner in 

which it is being monitored. It’s important to differentiate between perceived risks and actual 

risks, which can be done by deploying at least 200 vehicles on the ground. 

•  There  is  a  need  for  blended  finance  facilities,  so  that  when  SIDBI  can  bring  down  the  rate  of 

interest, because if there is a higher upfront cost, rate of interest will be reasonable.  

•  SIDBI  operates  a  risk-sharing  facility  for  sectors  with  high  perceived  risks,  such  as  the  energy 

service  company  (ESCO)  market.  The  facility  provides  guarantees  to  lenders  for  projects  that 

have been technically appraised, offering them comfort even if the project fails. 

•  The risk-sharing facility has been successful in areas like energy efficiency, e-mobility for two and 

three-wheelers, and municipal solid waste, with no defaults reported. 

10 

 
 
•  Running  such  facilities  requires  risk  capital,  which  SIDBI  has  obtained  through  grants  from 

organizations like the World Bank, Shell Foundation, and GIZ. A similar risk-sharing facility for the 

trucking segment could help bring 200 vehicles on the ground, providing extra comfort to lenders. 

•  SIDBI  is  already  working  on  that  count  with  the  Green  Climate  Fund  and  other  funds  wherein 

there is an opportunity to bring in concessional capital in the country. 

•  There  are  cases  where  there  is  high-frequency  battery  swapping  possible  if  the  movement  is 

point-to-point-loop.  

•  By reducing the battery size of the vehicle as well as the downtime between the changes, upfront 

costs can be lowered significantly.  

•  The  residual  value  of  the  truck  can  be  seen  in  tandem  with  the  reusable  value  of  the  truck. 

commercial life is 10 years only for ICE trucks. Thereafter, retrofitting or resale are the only viable 

options. Therefore, swapping technology provides a benefit in terms of 15-20 years of utilization.  

•  A deep understanding of battery technology and asset management is essential for financiers to 

adapt  to  the  evolving  market.  The  presence  of  four  or  more  OEMs  with  mature  products  in  a 

segment indicates the first step of market readiness. 

• 

India  is  identified  as  a  “green  discount  market,”  in  contrast  to  Europe,  which  is  considered  a 

“green premium market.” 

•  Demonstration fleets are crucial for building market confidence by demonstrating the viability of 

ZET across various parameters including business and operational. 

•  Small fleet operators and market load operators are driving the transition and often outperform 

larger fleet operators due to their deeper investment in the success of their operation 

•  The challenge lies in understanding electric vehicles and their technology as a new asset class. 

•  Pre-delinquency management, a practice from the past, is being revisited to predict and prevent 

defaults based on vehicle data and customer behavior. 

•  Transport as a Service (TaaS) Model: The TaaS model, with asset financing and leasing at its core, 

is becoming increasingly relevant in the Indian trucking sector. This model addresses changes in 

ownership patterns and provides new financing solutions. 

•  Leasing solutions are emerging as a go-to-market strategy for OEMs and new market entrants to 

address these challenges. 

•  Logistic companies are considering a mix of leasing and direct loans for adopting electric trucks. 

This  mix  promotes  aggregation  and  economies  of  scale,  which  can  help  solve  ecosystem 

challenges and improve charging station and vehicle viability. 

11 

 
 
•  There is a need for evolved digital monitoring and pre-emptive checks to ensure maintenance 

and adherence to SOPs, especially when the driver is not the vehicle owner. 

•  Financing aggregation can lead to the opening of markets like green bonds, which are not viable 

at the individual operator level. This will be significant in the context of the evolving market. 

•  Supporting  leasing  companies  is  crucial  as  they  enable  longer  tenors  for  loans,  which  are 

necessary for the viability of truck operations. 

•  Small businesses with distribution reach are setting up new leasing platforms, indicating a trend 

towards more diverse financing options. The market is not expected to be dominated by a single 

player, suggesting a competitive and diverse market environment. 

•  Proper battery management, including cooling during charging and use, can extend the battery 

life cycle by 20-30%. 

•  The residual value of the battery electric truck, including the vehicle with or without the battery, 

is  not  currently  a  primary  consideration  for  fleet  operators,  as  OEMs  or  swapping  station 

providers manage the batteries. 

•  Lithium  iron  phosphate  batteries  used  in  EVs  have  a  defined  life  cycle  of  2500  cycles  at  25 

degrees Celsius, after which capacity depletes to 80%. 

•  After the first life cycle, batteries can be repurposed for secondary uses like solar applications, 

where they can undergo an additional 2000 cycles. 

•  A strong credit flow is necessary for scaling up quickly, which is crucial for OEMs and the viability 

of solutions like battery swapping. 

•  Removing the battery from the financing scope of the operator and providing separate financing 

for batteries and infrastructure could lower monthly instalments (EMIs) and prevent defaults. 

•  Granting  infrastructure  status  to  the  EV  sector  could  enable  priority  funding  and  financing, 

stimulating market growth. 

•  There is a need for central recognition and policy support for battery swapping systems, which 

some states have already implemented. 

•  The government should invest in infrastructure to support the EV ecosystem, possibly through 

Public-Private  Partnerships  (PPPs)  like  those  managed  by  the  National  Highway  Logistics 

Management Company (NHLM). 

•  Out of 1000 highway sites, only 200 have tenders for wayside amenities. The remaining 800 sites 

could include charging and swapping infrastructure in their tenders, potentially using hybrid or 

full annuity models. 

12 

 
 
•  The government could consider allocating 1000-2000 crore INR for VGF, with states contributing 

additional funds, to facilitate infrastructure development. 

•  Extending  the  tenor  of  loans  is  a  significant  change  for  banks  traditionally  financing  diesel 

vehicles, as it exposes them to more cycles of logistics’ cyclical nature. 

•  There  is  a  concern  about  technology  becoming  obsolete  over  extended  tenors,  especially  as 

battery and vehicle prices decrease, potentially affecting the renewal of contracts. 

•  The renewable sector has addressed similar challenges through government contracting, but the 

private sector requires a portfolio approach to manage market risks and provision risk capital. 

Breakout Session 2: Freight Emissions Accounting in India 

Objective 

1.  This session's goal was to discuss and envision a back-and-forth interaction with shippers and 

carrier organizations and attempt to get a grasp of their experiences regarding challenges faced 

by the logistics industry in dealing with their carbon emissions accounting.  

2.  The larger goal, intended in the months to follow, is to figure out how to combine the efforts being 

made by shippers and logistics companies and add a mechanism of incentive to it, either in the 

form  of  a  PAT-style  scheme  or  a  carbon  trading  system  developed  by  the  Bureau  of  Energy 

Efficiency. 

Topic Relevance to Freight Decarbonisation 

•  A significant portion of the economy is logistics. As the world's population grows, there will be a 

greater  need  to  move  goods,  and  this  will  lead  to  additional  legislative  pressure,  primarily  in 

Europe but also elsewhere. This pressure will eventually include carbon accounting and the need 

to act to truly decarbonise your emissions. 

•  There is essentially a road map that comprises of several pillars when it comes to decarbonising 

existing emissions. The first step is reporting and charting emissions since no significant action 

can be taken if they are not accounted for with some level of precision. Once the emissions are 

calculated,  scientific  knowledge-based  targets  may  be  established  Thereafter,  different 

decarbonisation mechanisms and tools can be deployed to cut emissions, and various actors 

along the same physical supply chain may be partnered with to really construct the ecosystem 

needed to achieve the change. 

Key Challenges in Freight Emissions Accounting 

•  The logistics sector in India needs a consistent emission accounting methodology for all players 

operating there. If the Emission framework is standardized, then the customer can understand 

13 

 
 
 
that one similar framework, the emissions being calculated is a standard, and thus, becomes 

comparable. 

•  Most emission calculation techniques or accounting techniques are dedicated to and focused 

on  Full  Truck  Load  (FTL)  freight.  The  same  tools  are  not  usable  for  Less-than-Truckload  (LTL) 

freight. 

•  Due  to  the  multi-tier  structure  of  a  freight  transport  system,  different  sets  of  benchmarks  are 

required for different hierarchies. As such, different emission factors are required for different 

types of vehicles, leading to complexities in the calculations. 

Way Forward 

•  As of now, the framework for emissions accounting has been developed. As a following step, a 

few pilot projects will be conducted to test the framework, and as such, partnerships for doing 

so, are already in the pipeline. For instance, the framework will be run through DP World, TCI, and 

Safe  Express,  among  others,  to  verify  its  applicability.  Thereafter,  the  focus  will  be  on  the 

development of the disclosure framework and the capability development framework. 

•  Smart  Freight  Centre  (SFC),  IIM  Bangalore,  and  The  Energy  and  Resource  Institute  (TERI)  are 

collaboratively  working  on  developing  the  emission  accounting  framework.  Principally  IIM 

Bangalore is supporting SFC on the creation of the data framework. At the same time, TERI and 

SFC are working together on the disclosure framework and the capacity development framework 

•  Support requirements from Shippers and Carriers: 

a)  Expression of interest in running the pilot projects. 

b)  Deciding the scope for running the pilot projects.  

•  Once the pilots are completed, the gap assessment is done. Eventually, all the variations and 

feedback will be integrated into the final framework before it is submitted to the regulatory body. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE I – Glimpses from the Workshop 

Figure 1 Key note address by SFC, NITI Aayog, MHI and SIDBI 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Group photograph with partners and stakeholders 

Figure 3Panel Discussion on Opportunities for ZET Deployment 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Panel Discussion on Strategic Levers for ZET Deployment at Scale 

Figure 5 Panel Discussion on Innovative Financing models for ZET ownership 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 TERI and IIMB presentation during session on Emissions Accounting Framework for India 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE II – List of participating Companies 

•  Ashok Leyland 

•  Maersk India 

•  Container Corporation of India  

•  Vaultus Green 

• 

IFC 

•  DP World 

•  Amazon 

•  Switchlabs Automobiles 

•  Wholsum Foods 

• 

JBM Group 

•  Sun Mobility 

•  VE Commercial vehicles 

•  Aditya Birla Group 

•  Bosch 

•  Greencell Mobility 

•  Pepsico 

• 

IPLT 

•  MoEving 

•  Safexpress 

•  Tata Power 

•  Transport Corporation of India Limited 

• 

ITC 

•  Reliance Industries Limited 

•  Power Finance Corporation 

•  Ckers Finance 

•  Mondelez 

•  MRF 

•  Creadble 

•  Cushman & Wakefield 

• 

Intugine 

19 

 
 
 
 
HOSTED BY 

Co-Hosts 

Knowledge Partners 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
