Voluntary Market Based 
Measures Framework 
for Logistics Emissions 
Accounting and Reporting 

September 2023

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting

2

© Smart Freight Centre. 2023.

This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in any form for educational or non-profit purposes 
without special permission from the copyright holder, provided acknowledgment of the source is made. 
Smart Freight Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of any material that cites this publication 
as a source. No use of this publication for resale or for any other commercial purpose may be made 
whatsoever without prior permission in writing from Smart Freight Centre.

About Smart Freight Centre

Smart Freight Centre is an international nonprofit organization focused on reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions from freight transportation. Smart Freight Centre’s vision is an efficient and zero emission global 
logistics sector. Smart Freight Centre works to guide the global logistics industry in tracking and reducing 
the industry’s greenhouse gas emissions by one billion tonnes by 2030 and to reach zero emissions by 
2050 or earlier, consistent with a 1.5°C future.

Disclaimer 

The views expressed in this publication are those of Smart Freight Centre and associated staff, 
consultants, and management, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Trustees of 
Smart Freight Centre. Smart Freight Centre does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in 
this publication and does not accept responsibility for consequences of their use. The authors make 
no representation regarding the utility or lack of utility of this framework in the context of regulatory 
disclosures of greenhouse gas emissions.

Authors

Dan Smith and Alan Lewis.

Suggested Citation

Smart Freight Centre. Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for 
Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting. 2023. 

Contact

Smart Freight Centre
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM
Amsterdam, Netherlands

Telephone: +31 6 4695 4405
www.smartfreightcentre.org
info@smartfreightcentre.org

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting 

3

Acknowledgements

This publication was developed with funding from the following organizations:

• A.P. Moeller-Maersk
• C.H. Robinson
• Deutsche Post DHL Group
• Frito-Lay Trading Company (Europe) GmbH
• GoodShipping
• Klaveness AS
• Renewable Energy Group, Inc.
• Shell

Each of these organizations also delegated representatives to sit on a Technical Working Group that provided 
extensive input to Smart Freight Centre during the drafting and refinement of the framework, starting in the fall 
of 2021 and continuing through the first quarter of 20231.

World Economic Forum served as a strategic partner in the accounting framework development project, 
supporting stakeholder engagement and communications, and delegating Forum experts to sit on the project 
Technical Working Group. The Forum also provided graphic design services to the project team.

Smart Freight Centre consulted and received input from advisors at CDP, Kühne Logistics University, 
and Science Based Targets initiative in developing this framework.This accounting framework would 
not have been possible without the dedication and support of people at the organizations listed above. 
However, this document does not necessarily represent the views of any organization listed in these 
acknowledgements, nor does inclusion of an organization’s name in these acknowledgements signify 
that organization’s endorsement of this framework.

1 Smart Freight Centre also received feedback on the principles described in this document through a thirty-day public comment period on a draft of the accounting 
framework during the spring of 2022, and through extensive engagement with a variety of other organizations working on book and claim chain of custody tools to 
accelerate transport decarbonization.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting 

4

Table of contents 

1. Introduction  

2. Purpose and scope of the framework, overview of freight transport supply chains  

3.: Chain of custody systems  

4. Chains of custody for products and for services 

5. Applying chain of custody concepts to transport supply chains  

6. Additionality of indirect generation low emission transportation services

7. Facilitating decarbonization across transport modes  

8. Vintage requirements for solutions and low emission transportation services  

9. Summary of book and claim scenarios and constraints  

10. Calculating the emission profile of low emission transporation services, and solutions  

11. Booking and claiming without erroneous double counting  

12. Conclusion  

Annex 1: Applying the framework to the mail and parcel sector 
Annex 2: Glossary  
Annex 3: References 

5

8

12

17

20

28

34

36

38

40

48

59

62
66
68

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

5

Introduction

1

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 1

6

Introduction 

The challenge

Freight transportation and logistics activities are the source of approximately 10% of global 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Without concerted reduction efforts, freight transportation 
emissions are forecast to increase by up to 42% by 2050 (1) – the opposite of what needs to 
happen if society is to achieve global climate goals.

Reducing freight  transportation GHG emissions, however, is often a difficult challenge. 
Freight transportation emission abatement costs can be high per tonne of GHG emission 
reduction and freight transportation supply chains can be large, complex, and dynamic. 
Heavy duty freight transportation is “hard to abate” (2).

Barrier to decarbonization: High emission abatement costs

The high cost of reducing freight transportation GHG emissions can serve as a significant barrier to 
the deployment of low emission transportation services (LETS)3.

Freight carriers4 generally bear the cost to reduce emissions from their operations. For example, 
the cost of purchasing low emission transportation assets or energy sources is often paid by the 
transportation asset owner or operator. However, the high cost of many low emission transportation 
solutions means that carriers often cannot voluntarily (i.e., without regulation that applies a low 
emission requirement to all carriers) implement LETS while remaining competitive.

Shippers and logistics service providers (LSP) can reduce the LETS cost burden for carriers, either 
through engagement with the carriers or through direct engagement with the provider of a low 
emission solution (i.e., a solution provider)5. The shippers and LSPs most interested in voluntarily 
bearing increased costs for LETS, though, are likely to be the shippers and LSPs interested in 
reducing their freight transportation GHG emission footprints. And these shippers and LSPs 
will generally want to report lower transportation supply chain GHG emissions in their emission 
inventories in exchange for bearing the extra costs of LETS.

2  As described here, freight can include mail and parcels. For an example of how the principles in this document may be applied in the mail and parcel sector, see Annex 1.
3  As defined here, a service is a piece of work done for a client or customer that does not involve manufacturing or producing goods. Transporting freight, or arranging the 
transportation of freight, are examples of services.
4  See Section 2 for a definition of carriers.
5  See Section 2 for a definition of shippers, LSPs, and solution providers.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 1

7

Barrier to decarbonization: Large, complex,  
and dynamic supply chains

The size, complexity, and dynamism of freight transportation supply chains can serve as a barrier to 
the deployment of LETS.

In many freight transportation supply chains:

• Shippers and LSPs work with many carriers or other LSPs. In some cases, shippers and  
  LSPs may not even know which carriers are actually moving their freight (particularly if  
  the transportation service is provided through several layers of subcontractors).

• Carriers work with many shippers and LSPs, most of whom currently have no interest in  
  paying a cost premium for LETS.

• Carriers, LSPs, and shippers have limited access to low emission solutions for their  
  shipments. Solutions, defined here as products to decarbonize heavy transportation, are    
  limited in availability and maturity.

• Individual transportation assets (e.g., trucks, aircraft, vessels) have limited regular    
  physical involvement with a particular shipper or LSP’s freight.

Under these circumstances, it can be very difficult for a carrier to directly access a solution, or for 
an LSP or shipper to directly access a LETS. Even if these organizations do have some direct 
access to solutions or LETS, it is difficult to link a LETS as generated with a specific transportation 
asset to significant GHG emission reductions in an individual shipper or LSP’s freight transportation 
GHG footprint.

Industry needs tools to overcome these barriers

There is significant demand for a framework to overcome these barriers. The demand is evident in 
the recent proliferation of commercial offerings for transportation “insetting” programs. The demand 
has also been clearly articulated by senior executives from over a dozen of the world’s largest freight 
forwarding, cargo carrying, and port operations organizations. During the fall of 2021, these senior 
executives issued a joint statement outlining the need for a low emission transport chain of custody 
standard that would facilitate decarbonization of freight transportation (3).

Barriers to freight transportation decarbonization can be reduced by a framework that outlines a 
way for shippers, LSPs, carriers, and solution providers to effectively partner with each other around 
LETS. The framework must:

1  Permit a provider of freight transportation or a solution provider to allocate the emission profile  

from abatement activities to the organizations that contribute to the abatement cost, even if those  

  organizations’ freight is not always transported using a low emission solution 
  or service.

2  Permit a purchaser of freight transportation to contribute to the cost premium of and 

report the GHG emission profile of LETS, even if their freight was not physically transported 

  on the LETS.

3  Be consistent, to the maximum extent practicable, with established freight transportation GHG  
  accounting methods, such as those described in the Global Logistics Emissions Council (GLEC)    
  Framework and in ISO Standard 14083:2023.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

8

Purpose and 
scope of the 
framework, overview 
of freight transport 
supply chains

2

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 2

9

Purpose and scope of the 
framework, overview of freight 
transport supply chains

Purpose

The accounting framework outlined in this document is intended to help address the barriers 
to heavy transport decarbonization described in the introduction. The framework focuses on 
voluntary actions by organizations to accelerate transport decarbonization. As discussed in 
detail in Section 6, this framework is intended to complement regulatory requirements for 
transport decarbonization.

This framework focuses on GHG emission accounting for low emission transportation 
solutions and LETS. This framework, focused as it is on GHG emission accounting and 
allocation, is based on and supplements the fundamental transportation GHG accounting 
principles described in the GLEC Framework.

Relationship of this framework to other tools

GHG emission accounting and allocation standards are only one element of an overall system to 
transparently calculate and track the emission profile of a low emission transportation solution and 
an associated LETS.

Consider, for example, a low emission fuel as a transportation solution. There are several elements 
of a system to calculate, track, and allocate the emission profile of the fuel from the fuel’s generation 
up to the GHG emission inventory in which the fuel’s emission profile is captured. More specifically:

1  A sustainability certification system, such as those managed by International Sustainability  
  and Carbon Certification (ISCC) or Roundtable on Sustainable Biomaterials (RSB), is a tool to  
  establish and track the sustainability profile of the fuel (including the fuel’s GHG emission factor). 

2  A registry and associated rules for the registry are tools to register and track the transfer of the  
  sustainability profile of the fuel according to a transparent and verifiable registry standard. 

3  Accounting principles, like those described in this Smart Freight Centre (SFC) framework, are  

tools to account for and allocate the emission profile of the fuel in organizational GHG 

  emission inventories.

As outlined above, this accounting framework focuses on accounting for and allocating the emission 
profile of low emission transportation solutions and LETS across transportation supply chains. Other 
organizations have developed or are developing tools for the determination and certification of the 
sustainability profile of low emission transportation solutions, and registries with rules for tracking 
the transfer of the sustainability profile of low emission transportation solutions.

 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 2

10

Figure 1. Elements of a system to track and allocate 
the emission profile of a low emission fuel

Sustainability Certiﬁcation System

Rules for Registry

Registry

SFC Accounting Framework

Establish and track the sustainabilty 
proﬁle of the fuel

Register and track the transfer of the 
sustainability proﬁle of the fuel, according to a 
transparent and verifable standard

Account for and allocate the emission proﬁle
of the fuel in GHG emission inventories

Application of the types of approach that accelerate investment in low emission transport 
solutions and services as set out in these guidelines are still relatively new. Hence, 
understanding and the systems that support them are evolving quickly.  As a result we 
anticipate that open discussions between industry partners, together with implementation in 
the market, will lead to changes as the framework’s strengths and weaknesses are revealed 
in practice. The Book and Claim Community recently launched by SFC and RMI is one place 
where such discussions may take place.

Organizations in freight transportation supply chains

As described in Section 1, freight transportation supply chains can be large and complex, 
and may involve many different organizations for a single unit of freight. There are four 
general categories of organization in freight transportation supply chain addressed in this 
accounting framework.

Carriers

Carriers are organizations that operate transportation assets to conduct transportation activity in 
providing transportation services.

LSP

LSPs are organizations that secure and facilitate transportation activity for shippers. LSPs, as 
defined here, do not operate their own transportation assets or conduct transportation activity. 
Instead, LSPs hire carriers to transport the LSPs’ customers’ freight6.

Shippers

Shippers are organizations with freight that needs transportation. A shipper may retain an LSP 
to arrange transportation of the shipper’s freight. A shipper may also contract with carriers 
directly for freight transportation activity.

6  Organizations that serve as LSPs may operate transportation assets for providing transportation services. In some circumstances, then, an LSP may also be a carrier.

 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 2

11

Solution 
providers

Low Emission Solution Provider (Solution Provider) Solution providers are organizations that 
provide a low emission material or product to the transportation market. Solution providers 
do not conduct transportation activity, nor do they contract for freight transportation activity 
on behalf of their customers. Instead, solution providers provide the products that make LETS 
possible. One example of a solution provider is a supplier of a low emission fuel.

Focus on Roundtable on Sustainable Biomaterials

RSB has developed a book and claim standard that includes requirements related 
to the assessment, certification, and transaction of the sustainability attributes 
(including, but not limited to, the GHG emission profile) of low emission aviation and 
marine fuels.

The RSB book and claim standard, outlined in the RSB Book & Claim Manual, 
describes the rules which allow an organization to register, transfer, and retire book 
and claim units (sometimes referred to elsewhere as credits or certificates) in the RSB 
book and claim system. An RSB book and claim registry also forms a part of RSB’s 
book and claim system (4).

The RSB book and claim standard complements this SFC accounting framework. 
That is: 

• The RSB Book & Claim Manual explains the requirements for determining and  
  tracking  the sustainability characteristics of bioenergy (including the bioenergy’s  
  emission profile)  from the point at which those characteristics are decoupled from  
  the physical bioenergy  product to the point at which those characteristics are  
  retired by a transport service provider or other organization.

• The RSB Book & Claim Manual describes requirements associated with the 
  registration, transaction, and retirement of book and claim units (units that represent 
  the right to a  claim through retirement and corresponding to a unique set of    
  sustainability benefits (5)).

• The SFC accounting framework describes how organizations can allocate and  
  account for the GHG emission profile of bioenergy associated with an RSB book  
  and claim unit in GHG emission inventories and declarations.

In general terms, the RSB standard outlines requirements for establishing, certifying, 
registering, transferring, and retiring book and claim units associated with the 
emission profile of bioenergy through the RSB book and claim system. The SFC 
framework explains how to take an emission profile (a profile that could have been 
established, certified, registered, transferred, and retired through the RSB book and 
claim system), and to apply that emission profile in calculating and allocating a GHG 
emission footprint across a transportation supply chain.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

12

Chain of custody 
for products 
and for services

3

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 3

13

Chain of custody systems

Introduction to chain of custody systems

Organizations need to know the emission profiles associated with the LETS that they pay 
to support. An organization is not likely to pay a premium for a LETS if that LETS cannot be 
quantified or accounted for in their GHG emission reporting and target setting. A chain of 
custody system is therefore the foundation of a framework for shippers, carriers, LSPs, and 
solution providers to partner around deploying LETS.

A chain of custody system can generally be defined as a set of measures underlying the process 
by which materials or products (and information on those materials or products) are transferred, 
monitored, and controlled as they move through each step in a supply chain (6). There are several 
models for chain of custody systems.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 3

14

Physical separation

A physical separation chain of custody model requires the physical segregation of materials or 
products with certain characteristics as those materials or products move through a supply chain.

Figure 2 shows an example of a physical separation chain of custody model for liquid fuels. 
Conventional fuel and low emission fuel are not mixed with each other during distribution. The 
emission profile of the low emission fuel (a characteristic of the fuel) remains coupled with the 
low emission fuel, and the emission profile of the conventional fuel remains coupled with the 
conventional fuel, from generation to consumption.

ISO Standard 22095:2020 distinguishes between “identity preserved” and “segregated” chain 
of custody models. Some other organizations also make a distinction between these models 
– with what may be varying interpretations of the difference between “identity preserved” and 
“segregated” models. This SFC accounting framework does not distinguish between “identity 
preserved” and “segregated” models. The source (or identity) of a product could be tracked as 
a characteristic of that product through a product distribution network, and potential distinctions 
between “identity preserved” and “segregated” models are not material in the context of this 
framework. As such, both “identity preserved” and “segregated” models are treated simply as 
physical separation models in this framework.

Figure 2. A physical separation chain of custody model

Conventional 
Fuel Provider

Low Emission 
Fuel Provider

Emission Proﬁle of
Conventional Fuel

Emission Proﬁle of
Low Emission Fuel

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 3

15

Mass balance

A mass balance chain of custody model allows the mixing of materials or products with certain 
characteristics with other materials or products as they move through a supply chain. The 
amount and the characteristics of the materials or products are tracked separately from each 
other throughout the distribution process, even though the materials or products themselves are 
physically mixed.

Figure 3 shows an example of a mass balance chain of custody model for liquid fuels. Although 
the conventional fuel and low emission fuel are mixed, the proportion of the fuel mix comprised 
of conventional fuel and the proportion of the fuel mix comprised of low emission fuel is tracked 
throughout distribution. The emission profile of both the low emission fuel and of the conventional 
fuel both go to the fuel consumer that physically receives the mixed product.

ISO Standard 22095:2020 describes a “controlled blending” chain of custody model. This SFC 
framework does not distinguish between mass balance and controlled blending models. Instead, 
mass balance is defined here to mean a model in which the organization allocated the special 
characteristics of a product (e.g., the emission factor of a low emission fuel) physically receives a 
known amount of product with those special characteristics over a certain period of time.

For example, a fuel provider sells a carrier a 10% low emission fuel blend. An individual batch of fuel 
that the carrier receives from the fuel provider may or may not physically be comprised of 10% low 
emission fuel molecules. However, averaged over all loads of fuel that the carrier receives from the 
fuel provider, 10% of the fuel that the carrier receives is comprised of low emission fuel molecules.

Figure 3. A mass balance chain of custody model

Emission Proﬁle of Conventional Fuel

Conventional
Fuel Provider

Conventional
Fuel Provider

Low Emission 
Fuel Provider

Emission Proﬁle of
Low Emission Fuel

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 3

16

Book and claim

A book and claim chain of custody model allows the mixing of materials or products with certain 
characteristics with other materials or products as they move through a supply chain. The 
characteristics of the materials or products are tracked separately from the physical material or 
products – these characteristics are not connected to the physical flow of materials or products.

At some point after a material or product is generated, the characteristics of that material or 
product are decoupled from the physical material or product and cataloged in a tracking system, 
or “booked.” Those characteristics may subsequently be “claimed” from the tracking system. 
The entity claiming the special characteristics of the material or product may have no physical 
involvement with the material or product with special characteristics.

Figure 4 shows an example of a book and claim chain of custody model for liquid fuels. The 
conventional fuel and low emission fuel are mixed. The emission profile of the low emission fuel is 
tracked separately from the emission profile of the conventional fuel. The proportion of conventional 
fuel in the distribution system is not accounted for separately from the proportion of low emission 
fuel in the distribution system. The organization that claims the emission profile of the low emission 
fuel may not physically receive any low emission fuel.

Figure 4. A book and claim chain of custody model

Conventional Fuel Providers

Emission Proﬁle of 
Conventional Fuel

Low Emission 
Fuel Provider

Emission Proﬁle of 
Low Emission Fuel

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

17

Chains of custody 
for products 
and for services

4

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 4

18

Chains of custody for products 
and for services

Chain of custody systems for products

The three examples in the previous section describe chain of custody models for a physical product, 
liquid fuel.

Any of the three chain of custody models described above (physical separation, mass balance, or 
book and claim) may be viable for tracking physical fuels and their characteristics, depending on 
the configuration of the fuel distribution network. In some cases, fuel suppliers can track fuel and its 
attributes by mass balance, in others, by book and claim, and in certain cases, low emission fuels 
are physically separated from conventional fuels.

For the purposes of this document, the characteristics of fuels that are tracked through a chain of 
custody system include the7:

1  Energy content, mass, or volume of the fuel. 

2  Life cycle GHG emission factor of the fuel (see Section 10 for more on emission factors).

3  Feedstocks (including the percentage of biogenic material in the feedstock, where applicable)  
  and production processes for the fuels.

There are numerous other attributes of low emission fuels that may be of interest. For example, 
whether a fuel was produced in a manner to protect soil and water, or if a fuel was produced in a 
way that protects land with high biodiversity value or cultural values. These other attributes, while 
important, are not addressed in this framework.

Chain of custody systems for services

A physical product, like a low emission fuel, is different from a transportation service. A 
transportation service is a certain amount of mode-specific (or transport operation category-
specific)8 transportation activity (i.e., the amount of freight transported and the distance that freight 
was transported)9.

A transportation service is not a physical product. A transportation service may be conducted using 
a physical product.

As defined in Section 2, shippers and forwarders purchase or facilitate the provision of transportation 
services. Similarly, as defined in Section 2, carriers sell transportation services (they do not sell 
physical products).

A mass or volume of a low emission fuel, in and of itself, may be of very little value to a shipper or a 
forwarder. A shipper or a forwarder does not need a mass or volume of fuel. A shipper or forwarder 
needs freight transportation activity. Similarly, the value of a mass or volume of fuel for a carrier 

7  The three characteristics represented here are the minimum characteristics necessary to enable the calculation of GHG emission inventories as described later 
in this framework, and for purchasers of the characteristics of the fuel to have information that allows them to understand the general origins of the fuel. 
8  See Section 7 for more information on transport operation categories.
9  See Section 10 for more information on transport activity.

 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 4

19

stems from the fuel’s ability to be used in generating transportation activity.
As such, this framework must address more than chain of custody models for physical products 
like low emission fuels. This framework must also address the allocation of the characteristics of 
transportation services.

A chain of custody approach may be applied to the characteristics of a transportation service. 
In this approach, the characteristics of the transportation service are tracked (rather than the 
characteristics of a physical product).

For example, a carrier may move freight with trucks powered by a low emission fuel. The 
carrier’s trucks are using a physical product (i.e., a low emission fuel) to conduct a LETS. The 
characteristics of this LETS could then be tracked with a chain of custody system through a 
transportation supply chain.

For the purposes of this framework, the characteristics of transportation services that 
are tracked through a chain of custody system include the:

1  Mode of transportation associated with the service (see Section 7 for more on 

transportation modes). 

2  The amount of transportation activity conducted (see Section 10 for more on 

transportation activity).

3  The GHG emission intensity of the LETS (see Section 10 for more on emission intensities).

4  The total GHG emissions resulting from the amount of transport activity conducted.

5  Where applicable, the transportation operation category of the service (see Section 7 for 
  more on transportation operation categories).

A book and claim chain of custody system for transportation services

The flexibility of a book and claim model addresses the constraints on transport 
decarbonization described in Section 1. That is, a book and claim chain of custody model 
for a transportation service:

• Permits a purchaser of freight transportation services to contribute to and report the GHG   
  emission profile of a LETS, even if that service does not directly involve the transportation   
  assets that physically transport their freight.

• Permits a provider of freight transportation services or a solution provider to assign the  
  emission profile of a low emission solution or of a LETS to the organizations that pay a  
  premium for the LETS or solution, even if those organizations’ freight is not always physically  
  transported on a low emission transportation asset or using a low emission solution.

A book and claim chain of custody model is therefore preferred for tracking LETS.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

20

Applying chain of 
custody concepts 
to transport 
supply chains

5

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 5

21

Applying chain of custody concepts 
to transport supply chains

Booking and claiming transportation solutions and services

Carriers, LSPs, shippers, and solution providers have different roles in transportation supply 
chains. They also have different roles in booking and claiming LETS or the solutions that make 
LETS possible.

There are several ways each category of organization listed above can book and can claim, and 
different things that they can book and claim, in book and claim chain of custody systems for 
low emission solutions and LETS.

A key distinction between the ways each category of organization books or claims is whether 
there is:

• Direct generation of a LETS by a carrier conducting transport activity with a low emission 
   transportation solution; or 

• Indirect generation of a LETS by a carrier, shipper, or LSP that calculates an emissions footprint  
  based on the profile of a low emission solution, even though that solution may not have  
  been applied by their fleet or by the carriers in their supply chain.

Direct generation

In direct generation scenarios, there is a physical tie between a low emission solution and the carrier 
generating the LETS. That is, the carrier generating the LETS actually uses or deploys the low 
emission solution in that carrier’s owned or operated fleet.

For example:

• A carrier purchases low emission fuel that is provided to the carrier through a physical separation 
  chain of custody system. The carrier, based on the definition of physical separation chain of  
  custody systems for products outlined above, physically receives low emission fuel. There is a  
  physical tie between the carrier and the solution. Low emission fuel molecules are combusted in    
  the carrier’s transportation assets in conducting transport activity. 

• A carrier purchases low emission fuel that is provided to the carrier through a mass balance chain 
  of custody system. The carrier, based on the definition of mass balance chain of custody systems  
  for products outlined above, physically receives low emission fuel. Although this low emission  
  fuel may be mixed with conventional fuel, over a certain period of time, the fuel provider can  
  demonstrate that the carrier physically received a certain amount of low emission fuel. There is a    
  physical tie between the carrier and the solution. Low emission fuel molecules are combusted in    
  the carrier’s transportation assets in conducting transport activity.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 5

22

See Figure 5 for a depiction of a direct generation scenario. The carrier physically receives low 
emission fuel. The carrier conducts transport activity, at least in part, using that low emission fuel. 
There is a physical tie between the solution (i.e., the low emission fuel) and the carrier. The carrier 
has directly generated a LETS using a low emission fuel.

Figure 5. Direct generation of a LETS using a fuel procured 
through a mass balance chain of custody system

A carrier purchases low emission fuel through
a mass balance chain of custody system.

The carrier transports a mass of freight 
a certain distance using the low 
emission fuel, directly generating a 
LETS by conducting that low emission 
transportation activity.

Conventional 
Fuel Provider

Low Emission 
Fuel Provider

Carrier

Emission Proﬁle 
of LETS

Emission Proﬁle of
Low Emission Fuel

Indirect generation

In indirect generation scenarios, a physical tie cannot be made between a solution and a LETS. 
Instead, a carrier, shipper, or LSP calculates an emissions footprint as if a low emission solution was 
used in their owned-operated fleet (carriers) or by the carriers in their supply chain (shippers and 
forwarders).

For example:

• A carrier purchases the characteristics of a low emission fuel through a book and claim chain  
  of custody system. The carrier, based on the definition of book and claim chain of custody  
  systems for products outlined above, may not physically receive any low emission fuel. There  
  is no physical tie between the carrier and the solution. It cannot be demonstrated that low   
  emission fuel molecules were combusted in the carrier’s transportation assets in conducting  
  transport activity. 

• An LSP purchases the emission profile of a low emission fuel directly from a fuel provider.    
  There is no guarantee that the low emission fuel provider physically provided low emission fuel  
  to the LSP’s contracted carriers. There is no physical tie between the LSP and the solution.  
  The low emission fuel may not be combusted in transportation assets owned or operated by  
  carriers that the LSP has contracted with to conduct transport activity.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 5

23

See Figure 6 for a depiction of an indirect generation scenario. The LSP’s contracted carriers do 
not necessarily physically receive low emission fuel. The LSP generates a LETS using the emission 
profile a low emission fuel that may not have actually been burned by the LSP’s contracted carriers. 
There is no physical tie between the solution (i.e., the low emission fuel) and the LSP. The LSP has 
indirectly generated a LETS based on the profile of a low emission fuel.

Figure 6. Indirect generation of a LETS using the profile of a fuel
purchased through a book and claim chain of custody system

A solution provider produces a low emission fuel that is distributed 
according to a book and claim chain of custody model.

Conventional Fuel Providers

An LSP claims the proﬁle of the low emission 
fuel and calculates the amount of 
transporation activity that could have been 
conducted if the low emission fuel were 
consumed by carriers in its network.

Emission Proﬁle of 
Low Emission Fuel

Low Emission 
Fuel Provider

Emission Proﬁle 
of LETS

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 5

24

Booking and claiming the profiles of solutions and LETS

Different types of booking and claiming, classified by category of organization, are as follows.

Carriers

Direct book
A carrier conducts a LETS by directly applying a low emission solution to the transportation of 
freight, using the carrier’s owned or operated transportation assets. The carrier books an 
emission profile for the transport activity on the LETS. For example: 

• A carrier uses a low emission fuel in the carrier’s owned or operated assets. The carrier  
  secures the fuel, a solution, either through a physical separation or a mass balance chain    
  of custody system. The carrier’s transportation assets consume the low emission fuel when  
  conducting transportation activity. 

• A carrier deploys electric trucks in its fleet. The electric trucks, either owned or operated by  
  the carrier, are conducting transportation activity moving cargo for the carrier’s customers.

Indirect book

A carrier generates a LETS by applying the emission profile of a solution as if the solution were used 
by the carrier. That is, the carrier claims the emission profile of a solution from a solution provider 
and books a LETS based on that solution’s profile – even though the carrier does not physically 
deploy the solution in the carrier’s owned or operated fleet.

For example, a carrier purchases the emission profile of a low emission fuel and substitutes this 
emission profile for the profile of the fuel consumed in the carrier’s owned or operated assets. 
The carrier secures the emission profile of the low emission fuel through a book and claim chain 
of custody system. The carrier may not actually consume any low emission fuel in the carrier’s 
transportation assets when conducting transportation activity.

Claim and rebook

A carrier claims a LETS directly generated by another carrier and books that service. The claimed 
LETS become indirect transportation services for the claiming carrier (because the claiming carrier is 
not physically conducting a LETS itself).

 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 5

25

LSP

Indirect book

An LSP generates a LETS by applying the emission profile of a low emission solution as if the 
solution were used by the LSP’s contracted carriers. The LSP books an emission profile for a 
certain amount of transport activity associated with the LETS.

For example, an LSP purchases the emission profile of a low emission fuel and substitutes 
this emission profile for the emission profile of the fuel consumed by carriers conducting 
transportation activity on behalf of LSP. The LSP secures the emission profile of the low emission 
fuel through a book and claim chain of custody system. The LSP’s contracted carriers may not 
actually consume any low emission fuel in these carriers’ transportation assets when conducting 
transportation activity.

Direct claim and rebook

An LSP claims a LETS directly generated by a carrier in the LSP’s contracted carrier network and 
books that service for claiming by the LSP’s customers.

Indirect claim and rebook

An LSP claims a LETS indirectly generated by a carrier in the LSP’s contracted carrier network or 
a LETS directly generated by a carrier outside of the LSP’s contracted carrier network and books 
that service for claiming by the LSP’s customers.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 5

26

Shippers

Book

Shippers do not book LETS or solutions. Instead, shippers apply the characteristics of LETS 
or solutions to their GHG emission inventories. That is, the shipper is not “booking” these 
characteristics for “claiming” by another organization.

Direct claim

The shipper claims: 

1  A LETS directly generated by a carrier in the shipper’s contracted carrier network. 

2  A direct generation claim and rebook from one of the shipper’s contracted LSPs.

Indirect claim

The shipper claims a LETS: 

1  From a carrier that indirectly generates the LETS.

2  From a carrier that has claimed and rebooked a LETS.

3  Indirectly generated or indirectly claimed and rebooked by an LSP.

Alternatively, a shipper can claim the emission profile of a solution from a solution provider and 
generate a LETS by applying the emission profile of the solution as if the solution were actually used 
by the shipper’s carriers.

For example, a shipper purchases the emission profile of a low emission fuel and substitutes this 
low emission fuel’s profile for the emission profile of the fuel consumed by carriers conducting 
transportation activity for the shipper. The shipper secures the emission profile of the low emission 
fuel through a book and claim chain of custody system. The carriers transporting the shipper’s 
freight may not consume any low emission fuel in these carriers’ transportation assets.

 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

27

Solution 
provider

Book 

Solution providers cannot book LETS.

Solution providers can book the profiles of solutions. The emission profiles of these solutions 
can be claimed by carriers, shippers, or LSPs to indirectly generate LETS.

Provide 

Solution providers can also provide a solution to a carrier who directly generates a LETS using 
that solution.

Tracking book and claim activity

Organizations in transportation supply chains may rely on independent registries for 
tracking book and claim activity. Registries already exist to track the profiles of solutions like 
sustainable aviation and marine fuels (see Section 2).

Registries that track the profile of solutions do not necessarily serve as tools to track the 
profiles of LETS generated from the solutions.

For example, an LSP claims the profile of a mass or volume of sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) 
that is tracked in a SAF registry. The LSP may need to implement their own system to track 
the LETS that the LSP indirectly generates based on the profile of the SAF. That is, the SAF 
registry may contain information on the SAF as a product, but not contain information on the 
transport activity that could be conducted if the SAF were consumed by the LSP’s air carriers 
to generate a LETS.

In this example, the LSP could claim a SAF profile from a SAF registry and still need to book a 
LETS (based on the SAF profile) for claiming by the LSP’s customers. The latter booking and 
claiming, of the LETS profile, may be separate from the former booking and claiming, of the 
SAF profile.

 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

28

Additionality of 
indirect generation 
low emission 
transportation 
services

6

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 6

29

Additionality of indirect generation 
low emission transportation services

Organizations booking or claiming direct generation of a LETS can demonstrate a physical 
connection between their supply chain and a LETS. That is, in all direct generation book and 
claim scenarios, a LETS was actually generated somewhere within in the booking or claiming 
organization’s transportation supply chain.

The same cannot be said for indirect generation of LETS. In indirect generation book and claim 
scenarios, a LETS was assumed to be generated or a solution assumed to be applied somewhere 
– but not necessarily by the booking or claiming organization or by that organization’s contracted 
transportation service suppliers.

Calculation of the emission profile of a LETS for indirect generation scenarios therefore requires 
an organization to make assumptions about what transportation activity could be conducted with 
a solution. In indirect generation scenarios, the booking and claiming organizations likely do not 
know what transportation activity actually was conducted with the solution.

Because of these assumptions inherent in indirect LETS generation scenarios, it is reasonable 
to impose constraints on indirect generation scenarios to ensure that the flexibility afforded by a 
book and claim framework is driving additional decarbonization of the transport sector. All indirect 
LETS must therefore be additional. 

Defining additionality

Additionality is defined here as a criterion for assessing whether a solution or a LETS are required 
by regulation.

This definition of additionality is different from, but not necessarily inconsistent with, the definition 
of additionality applied in the Greenhouse Gas Protocol. The Greenhouse Gas Protocol defines 
additionality as a criterion for assessing whether a project has resulted in GHG emission 
reductions or removals in addition to what would have occurred in the project’s absence (7). 
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol definition of additionality, then, addresses additionality from a 
project perspective.

Another way to consider additionality is in the context of activities associated with outputs from 
projects. For example, a project may involve the construction of a facility that produces low 
emission electrofuels. The output of that project is the low emission electrofuel produced at 
the plant.

The framework outlined in this document addresses the emission profile associated with solutions 
and LETS as opposed to the emission profiles of projects. Continuing the example above, this 
framework addresses the allocation of the emission profile of fuel produced at the electrofuels 
plant, not the emission reductions theoretically made possible by construction of the plant.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 6

30

Regulation and additionality

Regulation can be a powerful tool to accelerate the deployment of LETS. Regulation can overcome 
the barriers to decarbonization described in Section 1, and do so without a voluntary framework. For 
indirect generation scenarios (i.e., where a physical connection cannot be established between a 
low emission solution and an organization’s supply chain), this document focuses on facilitating the 
uptake of LETS beyond regulatory requirements.

Assessing additionality

Additionality needs to be assessed on a case-by-case basis for a specific LETS or solution as it 
relates to a specific regulatory requirement. A case-by-case assessment is necessary because 
regulations vary broadly across modes and geographies and because their applicability varies 
across the categories of organizations addressed in this document (i.e., shippers, LSPs, carriers, and 
solution providers).

Another variable across different regulations is the way regulatory requirements are framed. Some 
regulations prescribe a specific action. Some regulations prescribe a certain outcome.

An example of a regulation that prescribes a specific decarbonization action could be a fuel 
blending mandate. Regulators require fuel suppliers (i.e., solution providers) to implement the 
action of blending a certain amount of low emission fuels in with the conventional fuels that the 
supplier provides.

An example of a regulation that prescribes a certain decarbonization outcome could be an 
operational carbon intensity requirement. Regulators require carriers to realize a certain carbon 
intensity for their assets, an outcome that could be achieved by many combinations of specific 
actions (e.g., efficiency retrofits, changes in how the asset is deployed or operated, or use of low 
emission fuels).

Requirements for a particular action

If a regulation prescribes a specific LETS or solution, then to the extent that a LETS or solution 
achieves that regulatory requirement, the LETS or solution are not additional. Use of a solution or 
deployment of a LETS beyond the regulatory requirement could still be additional.

For example, if a regulation requires a fuel supplier to include 2% low emission fuel in all fuel 
provided in a certain region, volumes of low emission fuel that go to meet that 2% blend mandate are 
not additional. Volumes of low emission fuel provided in that region beyond the 2% blend mandate, 
however, would be additional with respect to the 2% blend mandate regulatory requirement.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 6

31

Requirements for an outcome

If a regulation prescribes a certain outcome and does not specify a particular solution or 
associated LETS, then: 

• To the extent that a specific LETS or solution’s contribution to the achievement of a required 
   outcome can be quantified by regulation and to the extent that the quantified LETS or solution  
  is applied towards achievement of an outcome requirement, the solution or associated LETS  
  is not additional. 

• When the contribution of a specific LETS or solution to the achievement of a required outcome 
  cannot be quantified under the regulation, or when the LETS or solution are not applied  
  towards achievement of the outcome requirement, the solution and associated LETS 
  are additional.

For example, the Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) 
outlines offsetting requirements for certain aircraft operators. These offsetting requirements may be 
reduced if the aircraft operator claims emission reductions from the use of CORSIA eligible fuels. 
Volume IV, Chapter 3 of Annex 16 to the Convention on International Aviation includes a formula for 
calculating aircraft operator claims for emission reductions from the use of CORSIA eligible fuels 
(8). An air carrier’s use of SAF towards achievement of the CORSIA offsetting requirement, then, 
can be quantified by a method established under the regulation. Similarly, there is a process by 
which an air carrier can claim a quantitative reduction in the offsetting requirement based on the 
use of SAF. Therefore, SAF applied by a carrier in such a claim for reduced offsetting requirements 
under CORSIA is not additional.

In another example, Annex VI of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from 
Ships outlines operational carbon intensity requirements for certain vessels. These carbon intensity 
requirements may be achieved by any number of activities, including the use of low emission fuels. 
While the impact of the use of low emission fuel on operational carbon intensity can theoretically 
be quantified, there is not a method for assessing the relative contribution of the use of low 
emission fuels to the achievement of operational carbon intensity requirements under Annex VI. 
There is also not a process by which an ocean carrier can claim a quantitative reduction in its 
carbon intensity requirements based on the carrier’s use of a low emission fuel. Until a method to 
determine the contribution of using a low emission fuel as solution towards achieving a vessel’s 
operational intensity requirements is established under Annex VI, and until vessel operators could 
claim the use of low emission fuel as a means to reduce their carbon intensity requirements, the 
use of the low emission marine fuel in generating a LETS is additional with respect to Annex VI 
operational intensity requirements.

10  See Section 7 for more on transportation modes

 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 6

32

Additionality and cross modal opt-in schemes

An additionality analysis can be complicated by situations where regulations allow organizations 
providing a solution for one mode of transport to voluntarily create “credits” that may be applied 
towards achievement of a regulatory requirement for another mode of transport10. In these 
situations, deployment of a voluntary solution for one mode could allow for reduced deployment of 
a required solution for another mode.

If a solution is assessed to be additional for one mode of transport, and generates credits applied 
towards achievement of regulatory requirements for another mode of transport, the solution is still 
additional. However: 

• When booking the emission profile of such a solution, the solution provider must disclose    
  the extent to which the solution for one mode is generating credits towards requirements for  
  another mode. 

• Organizations that claim the emission profile of solutions for one mode of transport, when 
  those solutions generate credits towards compliance with regulatory requirements for another  
  mode of transport, must clearly and explicitly disclose the extent to which LETS they generate  
  are based on a solution that is used to meet compliance obligations for another mode 
  of transport.

Jet fuel and the California Low Carbon Fuel Standard

One example of a situation where a voluntary solution for one mode can generate “credits” towards 
achievement of a regulatory requirement for another mode involves California Low Carbon Fuel 
Standard (LCFS) system credits for low emission jet fuel.

Conventional jet fuel is not subject to LCFS regulations. However, low emission jet fuel may be 
used to generate LCFS credits that a low emission jet fuel supplier could sell to a supplier of a fuel 
that is subject to LCFS regulations. As such, an organization that supplies a low emission jet fuel to 
the California market could generate credits that it then sells to an organization that needs to meet 
regulatory carbon intensity benchmarks for gasoline or diesel. That is: 

• Low emission jet fuel supplied to the California market could be considered additional if assessed   
in isolation. There is not a requirement for a fuel supplier to bring low emission jet fuel to the  
  California market. 

• If that low emission jet fuel generates LCFS credits that are then sold to an organization towards    
  achievement of gasoline or diesel intensity benchmarks, the low emission jet fuel LCFS credits are  
  allowing for reduced deployment of low emission intensity gasoline or diesel. The low emission jet  
  fuel LCFS credits allow an organization with gasoline or diesel carbon intensity benchmarks to 
  not supply low emission gasoline or diesel that the organization would otherwise be obligated 
  to supply.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 6

33

Marine fuel and Dutch renewable energy units

Another example of a situation where a voluntary solution can generate “credits” towards 
achievement of a regulatory requirement involves Dutch hernieuwbare brandstofeenhede (HBE) and 
low emission marine fuel.

Fuel suppliers who supply more than 500,000 liters of fuel to the Dutch market are required to 
have a certain number of HBEs in the Dutch Energy for Transport Registry at the end of a 
regulatory accounting period. The number of HBEs that must be in the registry is calculated based 
on the amount of energy a supplier provided to the Dutch road energy market during the 
accounting period.

An organization that generates more HBEs than that organization must have in the registry may sell 
those excess HBEs to other organizations. HBEs can be generated by providing renewable energy 
to the Dutch road transport sector. HBEs may also be generated by providing renewable marine 
fuels to ports in the Netherlands.

As such: 

• Low emission marine fuel supplied to the Dutch market could be considered additional if    
  assessed in isolation. There is not a requirement to generate HBEs in association with marine  
  fuels delivered to Dutch ports. The requirement for a fuel supplier to have a certain number  
  of HBEs registered is based on the amount of energy the supplier provides to the Dutch road  
  market, not the amount of marine fuel the supplier provides to the Dutch marine market. 

• If a fuel supplier generates HBEs by providing renewable marine fuels to Dutch ports and  
  sells those HBEs to another fuel supplier towards that other fuel supplier’s HBE registration  
  requirement for road fuels (or uses those HBEs towards the fuel supplier’s own HBE
  registration requirement for road fuels), the renewable marine fuel HBEs are allowing for  
  reduced deployment of renewable road fuels. That is, the renewable marine fuel HBEs allow  
  an organization with a road fuel-based HBE registration requirement to not supply renewable  
  road fuel that the organization would otherwise be obligated to supply.

Summary

A voluntary solution for one mode of transport may generate credits that are applied towards 
achievement of a regulatory requirement for another mode of transport. When assessed within the 
constraints of a transportation mode, the voluntary solution could be considered additional. When 
assessed within the constraints of transport GHG emissions, the voluntary solution would not be 
additional.

As discussed further in the next section, this framework attempts to accelerate decarbonization 
across all modes of transport. Therefore, the assessment of additionality in cross modal opt-in 
schemes is bound by mode. This framework also attempts to facilitate transparency in GHG 
emission accounting. Therefore, the framework requires organizations to disclose the extent to 
which solutions or LETS that are voluntary for one mode generate credits towards achievement of 
requirements for another mode.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

34

Facilitating 
decarbonization 
across transport 
modes

7

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 7

35

Facilitating decarbonization 
across transport modes

Modal constraint

One aspect of the heavy transport decarbonization challenge is scaling decarbonization across 
all modes of transportation. Modes of transportation, as defined here, include all the modes of 
transportation described in the GLEC Framework11.

The maturity, availability, and cost of solutions can vary significantly across modes of heavy 
transportation. Although the challenges and costs associated with decarbonizing transportation 
vary by mode, all modes of heavy transport must be decarbonized to decarbonize heavy 
transportation in its entirety.

It is for this reason that the mode of transportation associated with a LETS must be tracked in a 
book and claim chain of custody system for LETS. It is also for this reason that LETS are bound 
by mode12. This constraint precludes an organization from assigning the emission profile of LETS 
in one mode of transportation towards the emission footprint of other modes of transportation.

Transportation operation categories

Transportation operation categorization is a way of classifying transportation activity that provides 
organizations the ability to declare transportation emission information at a level of resolution not 
possible if all transportation activity is aggregated at the modal level.

A transportation operation category (TOC) is defined here as a group of transportation operations 
with similar characteristics (e.g., transportation asset type and size, load factor, or geography of 
operation) that correspond to how transportation services are provided and procured.

Some organizations face material differences in the challenges to decarbonization within a mode 
(e.g., decarbonization of a particular mode is significantly more difficult in one geography than 
in another) in their transportation supply chains. These organizations may voluntarily choose to 
constrain the booking and claiming of the characteristics of LETS by TOC rather than by mode 
alone. Application of a TOC level constraint, rather than a modal constraint, is one way to focus 
decarbonization efforts on specific challenges within a transportation mode.

11  Currently, these modes are air, inland waterways, logistics sites, rail, road and sea-ocean. The number of modes described in the GLEC Framework is subject to change.
12  The applicability of a low emission solution may not be bound by mode, to the extent that the solution is the same across modes. For example, renewable natural gas 
molecules could be consumed in an ocean going vessel or in a heavy duty truck. The solution itself is the same for both modes. So long as the solution is the same across 
modes and there is a link between the solution as provided and the relevant mode of transport (e.g., renewable natural gas molecules provided only to industrial facilities 
could not be treated as a transportation solution, while renewable natural gas molecules provided to a distribution network that feeds transport and industrial facilities could 
be treated as a transportation solution), the solution is not necessarily bound by mode.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

36

Vintage 
requirements 
for solutions 
and low emission 
transportation 
services

8

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 8

37

Vintage requirements for solutions and low 
emission transportation services

Ambiguity about when a solution was provided or when a LETS was generated can undermine trust 
in a book and claim chain of custody system for transport decarbonization. Lack of documentation 
about when solutions were provided or LETS generated may also confuse assessments of LETS 
additionality as regulatory requirements change with time. A vintage constraint can help address 
these potential challenges.

For details on the vintage requirements associated with each type of book and claim scenario, 
see Table 1.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

38

Summary of 
book and claim 
scenarios 
and constraints

9

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 9

39

TYPE OF 
BOOK OR 
CLAIM

DIRECT 
OR 
INDIRECT DESCRIPTIONS

ADDITIONALITY 
CONSTRAINT

MODAL 
CONSTRAINT

VINTAGE 
CONSTRAINT

NOTES

I

I

N
O
T
A
Z
N
A
G
R
O

F
O
E
P
Y
T

Does not 
Apply

Applies

LETS profile booked 
within 12 months of 
generation

The LETS may or may not reflect 
decarbonization already required by law. 
The purchaser of the LETS is encouraged 
to clarify with the booking carrier whether 
or not the LETS is additional.

r
e
i
r
r
a
C

r
e
i
r
r
a
C

Book

Direct

Book

Indirect

Indirect

Claim 
and 
Rebook

Carrier generates 
LETS, applying a 
solution within their 
owned-operated fleet

Carrier generates 
LETS using the profile 
of a solution, as if the 
solution was used in 
their owned-operated 
fleet

Carrier claims a LETS 
directly generated by 
another carrier, 
re-books the LETS

Applies

Applies

Applies

Applies

Book

Indirect

P
S
L

Direct

Claim 
and 
Rebook

Indirect

Claim 
and
Rebook

Applies

Applies

Does not 
Apply

Applies

Applies

Applies

LSP generates LETS 
using the profile of a 
solution, as if the 
solution was used by 
the LSP’s contracted 
carriers

LSP claims LETS 
directly generated by 
a carrier, then books 
that LETS for claiming 
by LSP customers

LSP claims a LETS 
indirectly generated 
by a carrier, then books 
that LETS for claiming 
by LSP customers

LETS profile booked 
within 12 months of 
booking of profile of 
solution associated with 
LETS profile

LETS profile booked 
within 12 months of 
booking of LETS that 
was claimed

LETS profile booked 
within 12 months of 
booking of profile of 
solution associated 
with LETS profile

LETS profile booked 
within 12 months of 
booking of LETS that 
was claimed

–

–

–

The LETS may or may not reflect 
decarbonization already required by law. 
The purchaser of the LETS is encouraged 
to clarify with the rebooking LSP whether or 
not the LETS is additional.

LETS profile booked 
within 12 months of 
booking of LETS that 
was claimed

–

r
e
p
p
h
S

i

r
e
d
i
v
o
r
P
n
o
i
t
u
o
S

l

Claim

Direct

Shipper claims LETS 
directly generated by 
a carrier

Does not 
Apply

Applies

LETS profile included in 
shipper inventory within 
24 months of the year of 
booking of LETS profile

The LETS may or may not reflect 
decarbonization already required by law. 
The shipper is encouraged to clarify with 
the booking carrier or LSP whether or not 
the LETS is additional.

Claim

Indirect

Shipper claims LETS 
indirectly generated 
by an LSP or carrier 
(including Carrier 
Claim and Rebook 
LETS), or claims the 
profile of a solution 
from a solution
provider

Applies

Applies

LETS profile included in 
shipper inventory within 
24 months of the year of 
booking of LETS profile

–

Book

Indirect

Solution provider 
books the profile of 
a low emission solution

Applies

Applies

Solution profile booked 
within 12 months of 
production13 of solution

–

Provide

Direct

Solution provider 
provides a solution to 
a carrier that directly 
generates a LETS 
using the solution

Does not 
Apply

Applies

Not applicable

The LETS may or may not reflect 
decarbonization already required by law. 
The carrier is encouraged to clarify with 
the solution provider whether or not the 
solution is additional.

13 “Production,” as defined here, will vary by solution type. For fuels, “production” may be the date on which the fuel was tested as conformant with fuel quality 
and safety standards for its intended use.

 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

40

Calculating the 
emission profile 
of solutions and 
low emission 
transportation 
services

10

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

41

Calculating the emission profile of 
solutions and low emission transportation 
services

Users of book and claim chain of custody systems to facilitate transportation decarbonization 
must be able to calculate and disclose the GHG emission profile of LETS. If an organization 
cannot calculate its GHG footprint based on the emission profile of a LETS, that organization has 
less incentive to pay extra for the LETS.

An organization can determine the GHG emission profile of a LETS or solution, as applied to their 
organization, by following three steps: 

1  Determine the organization’s mode-specific transport activity. 

2  Determine the energy consumption or emission intensity associated with the mode-specific  

transport activity.

3  Apply the GHG emission factor or emission intensity of a solution or LETS to the organization’s  

transport activity for each mode.

Organizations can use several metrics to conduct these three steps, principally, transportation 
activity, energy intensity, GHG emission intensity, and GHG emissions factors.

Transportation activity

Transportation activity is the product of the amount of freight14 transported and the distance that 
freight was transported:

Freight Transport Activity = Amount of Freight Transported × Distance that Freight was Transported

Freight transportation activity is often quantified in terms of mass multiplied by distance, such as 
tonne kilometers (tonne km). In specific circumstances, transport activity may also be quantified 
in terms of volume multiplied by distance, such as twenty foot equivalent unit (TEU) km.

Energy intensity

Energy intensity is the amount of energy consumed in conducting a certain amount of 
transport activity:

Energy Intensity =

 Amount of Energy  
 Transport Activity 

14   This framework focuses principally on freight. However, transportation activity can also be calculated for passenger transportation (e.g., passenger 
kilometers). A passenger specific example is also provided accordingly.

 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 10

42

GHG emission intensity

GHG emission intensity is the amount of GHG emissions generated for a certain amount of 
transport activity.

Greenhouse Gas Emission Intensity =

Mass of Greenhouse Gases Emitted
Transport Activity

GHG emission factor

The emission factor of an energy source is the mass of GHG emitted per unit of energy15:

Emission Factor of Energy =

Mass of Greenhouse Gases Emitted
Unit of Energy

As described in the GLEC Framework: 

• Emission factors must incorporate emissions resulting from all United Nations Framework   
  Convention on Climate Change Kyoto Protocol GHGs (currently, CO2, methane (CH4), nitrous  
  oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6),  
  and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3))16. Emission factors must be expressed in units of carbon dioxide  
  equivalent (CO2e). 

• The boundary for calculating GHG emission factors must include emissions associated with  
  the entire life cycle of the production and use of an energy source.

Examples of how to apply these metrics in calculating the emission profile of a LETS or solution 
are included below.

15  Examples of “units of energy,” as described here, include mass or volume of fuel.
16  Global Warming Potential (GWP) is a factor to convert from the mass of a non-CO2 gas released to the atmosphere and the equivalent mass of CO2. When 
calculating CO2 equivalents: 1. The source of the GWP (e.g., which Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Assessment Report) must be clearly stated and 
consistently used; 2. One hundred year GWPs (not including climate-carbon feedback) are recommended; 3. An explanation for deviations from the use of one 
hundred year GWPs must be provided.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 10

43

Example: Low Emission Marine Fuel 
and Ocean Freight Transportation

A shipper wants to apply the GHG emission profile of a low emission marine fuel towards the 
organization’s ocean freight transportation footprint. A fuel supplier offers to sell the shipper the 
emission profile of a low emission marine fuel. The low emission marine fuel has a GHG emission 
factor of 0.400 kg CO2e/kg fuel.

Step 1

The shipper calculates its ocean freight transport activity for an emission reporting period 
according to the steps described in the GLEC Framework. The shipper was responsible for 
5,000,000 TEU km of ocean freight transport activity.

Step 2

The shipper does not have primary data to determine the amount of fuel consumed for each TEU 
km of ocean transport activity conducted on its behalf.

The shipper does, however, have global average ocean container transport emission intensity 
information published through the Clean Cargo program. That intensity is 0.0664 kg CO2e/TEU km.

The shipper does not know the combination of fuel types that were used by carriers whose data 
led to the 0.0664 kg CO2e/TEU km intensity. However, the shipper is aware that most of its ocean 
cargo is carried in vessels burning marine gas oil (MGO). The GLEC Framework shows an average 
emission factor for MGO of 3.92 kg CO2e/kg fuel.

The shipper calculates a fuel consumption factor of 0.01694 kg fuel/TEU km:

0.0664

3.92

kg CO2 e 
/
kg CO2 e 
/

TEU km

=

0.01694

kg fuel

/

TEU km

kg fuel

The shipper was responsible for approximately 84,700 kg MGO consumption during the 
reporting period:

0.01694

kg fuel/

TEU km

× 5,000,000 TEU km = 84,694 kg MGO

 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 10

44

The gravimetric energy density (mega joule (MJ) energy per kg fuel) of MGO, however, is 5% 
higher than the gravimetric energy density of the low emission fuel. As such, the shipper would 
need to burn a greater mass of the low emission fuel than MGO to conduct the same amount of 
transportation activity. The shipper would be responsible for 88,929 kg of low emission fuel during 
the reporting period:

84,694 kg MGO × 105% = 88,929 kg low emission fuel

Step 3

The shipper wants to apply use of low emission fuel towards the shipper’s entire ocean freight 
emissions for the reporting period. As such, the shipper purchases the GHG emission profile 
associated with 88,929 kg of low emission fuel from the fuel provider.

The shipper’s ocean freight emission footprint for the reporting period is 35,571 kg CO2e.

88,929 kg fuel × 0.400

kg CO2 e /

kg fuel

= 35,571 kg CO2e

Constraints

This is an indirect generation claim scenario. The shipper does not know where the low emission 
marine fuel will be consumed, or the actual transportation activity conducted with that fuel.

The shipper claimed the emission profile of a solution from a solution provider. The solution may 
not have been applied anywhere in the shipper’s contracted marine transportation supply chain.

As such: 

• The shipper must consider the additionality of the marine fuel whose profile the shipper  
  purchased (additionality constraint). 

• The shipper may only apply the emission profile of the fuel only to the shipper’s marine  
  transportation emission footprint (modal constraint).

• The solution provider (i.e., the fuel provider) may not book the emission profile of the fuel    
  that was allocated to the shipper for claiming by another customer (controls to avoid double  
  counting, see Section 11).

 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 10

45

Example: Low Emission Aviation Fuel 
and Air Passenger Transportation

An organization wants to apply the emission profile of a low emission aviation fuel towards 
the organization’s business air travel footprint. A fuel supplier offers to sell the organization 
the emission profile of a Fischer-Tropsch processed agricultural residue aviation fuel with a life 
cycle emission factor of 0.33 kg CO2e/kg fuel.

Step 1

The organization calculates its transport activity at 1,000,000 passenger km (pkm) on regional 
aircraft, 4,000,000 pkm on narrow body aircraft, and 2,000,000 pkm on wide body aircraft.

Step 2

The organization has been provided a fuel consumption intensity factor of 0.05 kg fuel/pkm 
by its regional air carrier. The organization’s other air carriers do not provide fuel consumption 
intensity to the organization. As such, the organization calculates narrow and wide body fuel 
consumption intensities of 0.026 kg fuel/pkm (narrow body) and 0.027 kg fuel/pkm (wide body) 
based on International Council on Clean Transportation data (9).

The organization was responsible for 208,000 kg of fuel consumption during the 
reporting period:

(1,000,000 pkm)   0.05

(

kg fuel 

/

)

pkm

+ (4,000,000 pkm)

(

Step 3

kg fuel 

0.026 

)

pkm

+ (2,000,000)

(

/

kg fuel 

0.027 

pkm/

)

= 208,000 kg fuel

The organization decides to apply use of low emission aviation fuel towards only a portion of 
the organization’s air freight emissions and purchases the emission profile associated with 
100,000 kg of low emission fuel from the fuel supplier. The low emission fuel has an energy 
content comparable to that of conventional aviation fuel and, as such, one unit mass of the 
low emission fuel can be treated as generating the same propulsive force in a jet engine as 
one unit mass of conventional aviation fuel. Emissions associated with the remaining fuel can 
be calculated using the conventional aviation fuel life cycle emission factor of 3.891 kg CO2e/
kg fuel. The organization’s air passenger GHG emission footprint for the reporting period was 
453,228 kg CO2e:

(100,000 kg fuel)   0.33

(

kg CO2e
/

kg fuel 

)

+ (208,000 kg fuel – 100,000 kg fuel) 

(

3.891

kg CO2e
/

kg fuel 

)

= 453,228 kg CO2e

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 10

46

Constraints

This is an indirect generation claim scenario. The claiming organization does not know where the low 
emission aviation fuel will be consumed, or the actual transportation activity conducted with that fuel.

Instead, the organization claimed the emission profile of a solution from a solution provider. The solution 
may have not been applied anywhere in the claiming organization’s business travel supply chain.

As such: 

• The organization must consider the additionality of the aviation fuel whose profile it  
  purchased (additionality constraint). 

• The organization must apply the emission profile of the fuel only to the organization’s air  
  transportation emission footprint (modal constraint).

• The solution provider (i.e., the fuel provider) may not book the emission profile of the fuel    
  that was allocated to the organization with a business travel footprint for claiming by another  
  customer (controls to avoid double counting, see Section 11).

Example: Electrification of Road Transportation

A shipper wants to apply the emission profile from the use of electric trucks for road transportation 
towards the organization’s road freight footprint. The shipper procures truck transportation services 
through an LSP.

The shipper’s LSP contracts for road transportation with many carriers, some of whom operate 
electric trucks.

Step 1

The shipper is responsible for 8,000,000 tonne km of road transport activity over the reporting period. 
The LSP contracts for 1,000,000,000 tonne km of road transport activity over the reporting period, 
15,000,000 tonne km of which is conducted by electric trucks.

Step 2

Energy as electricity is not converted to transport activity in an electric motor by the same means 
that energy as diesel fuel is converted to transport activity in an internal combustion engine. Stated 
differently, a mass of diesel fuel with an energy content of one MJ cannot be assumed to generate 
the same propulsive energy in an internal combustion engine that one MJ of electricity generates in 
an electric motor. As such, energy consumption in the form of diesel burned in internal combustion 
engines needs to be expressed in terms comparable to electricity consumed in electric motors. 
Emission intensity can be used to enable this comparison across propulsion technologies.

The LSP collects data from its electric truck-operating carriers that shows that the GHG emission 
intensity of its 15,000,000 tonne km of contracted electric trucking activity for the reporting period is 
0.080 kg CO2e/tonne km (this emission intensity was reported by the carriers based on the principles in 
the Greenhouse Gas Protocol Scope 2 Guidance for purchased electricity).

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 10

47

The shipper determines that the overall average emission intensity for its road transportation footprint, 
as described in the GLEC Framework, is 0.150 kg CO2e/tonne km.

Step 3

The LSP has booked 15,000,000 tonne km of a road LETS at 0.080 kg CO2e/tonne km.

The shipper decides to apply use of the electric trucks towards only a portion of the organization’s road 
freight emissions and claims 5,000,000 tonne km of its LSP’s 15,000,000 tonne km electric truck LETS 
from the LSP (leaving 10,000,000 tonne km of electric truck LETS remaining in the LSP’s books).

The shipper’s road transportation emission footprint for the reporting period is 850,000 kgCO2e:

(

0.080

kg CO2e
/

tonne km

)

(5,000,000 tonne km) +   0.150 

(

kg CO2e
/

tonne km

)

(8,000,000 tonne km –  5,000,000 tonne km) = 850,000 kg CO2e 

Constraints

This is a direct generation booking scenario for the carriers, a direct claim and rebook scenario 
for the LSP, and a direct claim scenario for the shipper.

The carriers are generating an electric truck LETS by applying a solution (electric trucks) within 
their owned-operated fleets.

The LSP is claiming an electric truck LETS directly generated by carriers in the LSP’s contracted 
carrier network. The LSP has information from its carriers regarding the emission intensity of 
the electric trucking activity actually conducted in association with the LETS.

The shipper is claiming an electric truck LETS that has been claimed from a carrier by the LSP 
and rebooked by the LSP for claiming by the LSP’s customers.

As such: 

• An additionality assessment is not required. The electric trucking LETS was directly generated 
  in this carrier-LSP-shipper network (additionality constraint). 

• Neither the LSP nor the shipper may apply the electric trucking LETS emission intensity  
  towards transportation activity in non-road modes of transport (modal constraint).

• Neither the electric trucking carriers nor the LSP may book the emission profile of the electric  
  trucking activity that was allocated to the shipper for claiming by another customer (controls  
  to avoid double counting, see Section 11).

 
  
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

48

Booking and 
claiming without 
erroneous 
double counting

11

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 11

49

Booking and claiming without 
erroneous double counting

Proper booking and claiming of the emission profiles of solutions and LETS is necessary to 
avoid erroneous double counting. Double counting is defined here as two or more reporting 
companies taking ownership of the same GHG emissions or emission profile (7).

Not all double counting is erroneous. Because one organization’s direct emissions are often 
indirect emissions for another organization, there are two facets of the emissions associated 
with transport activity: 

1  The “emitter’s emissions,” or the emissions as they apply for the carrier conducting the  

transport activity. 

2  The “supply chain” emissions, or the emissions as they apply for the organization on whose  
  behalf the transport activity was conducted.

While counting both emitter’s emissions and supply chain emissions separately may be 
appropriate, LETS are bound by mode (or TOC)-specific transportation activity. Allocating the 
GHG emission profile of a LETS to more transportation activity than was conducted in that LETS 
will result in erroneous double counting of the emission profile of the LETS. That is, a solution 
used to either directly or indirectly generate a LETS generates a transport activity limited LETS.

Figure 7. Emitter’s emissions, supply chain emissions, emitter 
emission profiles, and supply chain emission profiles

The emitter emissions and the supply chain emissions are the same emissions. They are accounted for separately.

Emissions

Emissions

Emitter
Emissions

Supply Chain
Emissions

Emitter’s emissions include emissions generated during 
combustion of fuel (if any) and upstream emissions 
associated with fuel distribution and production (if any).

GHG accounting principles treat the emitter’s emissions and the supply 
chain emissions as two versions of the same thing.

Emissions Proﬁle

Emitter Proﬁle

Supply Chain Proﬁle

This accounting principle can also be applied to the emission proﬁle of 
solutions and LETS. The emitter proﬁle of a solution or a LETS can be tracked 
separately from the supply chain proﬁle of the solution or LETS.

 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 11

50

Principles to avoid incorrect double counting

Controls on who can book and who can claim can be a useful tool to avoid erroneous 
double counting.

Solution 
providers

Solution providers may book the profile of solutions:

• Bundled. In a bundled booking, the solution provider books the profile of the solution  
  associated with the emitter’s emissions together with the profile of the solution associated  
  with the supply chain emissions. 

• Unbundled. In an unbundled booking, the solution provider books the profile of the solution  
  associated with the emitter’s emissions separately from the characteristics of the solution   
  associated with the supply chain emissions.

The solution provider must clearly distinguish between bundled and unbundled solutions when 
booking solutions.

Solution providers may book bundled emission profiles for claiming directly by shippers or 
forwarders, without the booking going through a carrier.

Solution providers may allow a shipper or an LSP to claim the supply chain profile of an 
unbundled booking even if the solution provider does not have a carrier arranged to purchase 
the emitter profile of the unbundled booking. In these circumstances, the solution provider 
may either:

• Allow a carrier to claim the emitter profile associated with the supply chain profile that has   
  already been claimed by the shipper or LSP, if a carrier is found to claim the emitter profile  
  within 12 months of the claim of the supply chain profile. 

• Retire the emitter profile without the emitter profile being claimed by a carrier. Any unclaimed  
  emitter profiles that are retired by a solution provider must be documented by the solution   
  provider. Retired emitter profiles must be traceable.

See Figures 8-13.

Unbundling can increase the risk of double counting if a carrier that has not purchased the 
rights to the supply chain emission profile were to: 

1  Unknowingly book a LETS 

2  Report a lower emitter profile and customers with direct data access (e.g. supplier  
  engagement programs) were to then claim associated scope 3 reductions.

This risk is acknowledged and possible mitigation approaches are presented in the subsequent 
section “Declaring Different GHG Emission Information To Different Stakeholders”.  The extent 
of the risk will depend on the effectiveness of the book and claim registries that are in place.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 11

51

Carriers

Carriers can book a direct generation LETS only for the amount of transport activity they 
conducted with the solution applied to generate the LETS.

Carriers can book an indirect generation LETS only for the amount of transport activity they could 
have conducted if the solution were applied to generate the LETS in their owned-operated fleet.

If a carrier books a LETS and that LETS is claimed by another carrier, the booking carrier can no 
longer disclose an emission profile based on the LETS that it booked.

A carrier may claim the profile of either a bundled or unbundled solution from a solution provider.

If the carrier claims the profile of a bundled solution (see Figure 8):

• The carrier may report emissions based on that profile towards its own GHG emission footprint.

• The carrier may book a LETS, either directly or indirectly, based on the profile of the solution.

If the carrier claims the profile of an unbundled solution (see Figure 9):

• The carrier may report emissions based on that profile towards its own GHG emission footprint.

• The carrier may not book a LETS, either directly or indirectly, based on the profile of the solution.

Figure 8. Bundled booking

Emitter Proﬁle to Carrier Inventory

Claim

Emitter Proﬁle and 
Supply Chain Proﬁle

Emission Proﬁle 
of LETS

or

Book

Claim

Book

Claim

A carrier claims a bundled booking from a solution provider. The carrier applies the emitter proﬁle of the solution to their own emission inventory, and 
generates and books a LETS based on that proﬁle. A shipper or forwarder can then claim the proﬁle of the LETS from the carrier.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

52

Figure 9. Unbundled booking

Emitter Proﬁle to Carrier Inventory

Emitter Proﬁle

Claim

or

Retire

A carrier claiming the emitter proﬁle of the  
unbundled booking can apply the emitter proﬁle  
to their own emission footprint. The carrier cannot   
book a LETS based on that proﬁle for claiming by 
a Shipper or Forwarder.

If no carrier is found, the emitter proﬁle is retired 
by the solution provider.

Book

Claim

Supply Chain Proﬁle

or

A shipper or LSP can claim the supply chain  
proﬁle fromthe solution provider.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 11

53

LSP

LSPs can book indirect generation LETS only for the amount of transport activity that their carriers 
could have conducted if the solution were applied to generate the LETS by the LSP’s carriers. LSPs 
can claim and rebook LETS only for the amount of transport activity directly or indirectly generated 
by the carrier that generated the LETS.

An LSP may claim the profile of either a bundled (see Figure 10) or unbundled (see Figure 11) solution 
from a solution provider. If the LSP claims the profile of either a bundled or unbundled solution: 

• The LSP may report emissions based on the solution’s profile towards its own GHG emission footprint. 

• The LSP may indirectly generate and book a LETS based on the emission profile of the solution.

Figure 10. Bundled booking

Supply Chain Proﬁle to LSP Inventory

Emitter Proﬁle and 
Supply Chain Proﬁle

Emission Proﬁle 
of LETS

Book

Claim

Book

Claim

An LSP claims a bundled booking from a solution provider. The LSP can apply the supply chain proﬁle to their own emission footprint and book a LETS 
based on that proﬁle that is then claimed by a shipper.

Figure 11. Unbundled booking

Emitter Proﬁle

Book

Supply Chain Proﬁle

Claim

or

Retire

Claim

A carrier claiming the emitter proﬁle of the unbundled 
booking can apply the emitter proﬁle to their own emission
footprint. The carrier cannot book a LETS based on that 
proﬁle for claiming by a Shipper or Forwarder. 

If no carrier is found, the emitter proﬁle is retired 
by the solution provider. 

Book

Claim

Emission Proﬁle of LETS

Supply Chain Proﬁle 
to LSP Inventory.

An LSP claims the supply chain proﬁle of an 
unbundled booking and applies that proﬁle to their 
own emission footprint. The LSP generates a LETS 
based on the solution proﬁle and books that proﬁle. 
A shipper claims the LETS proﬁle from the LSP.

 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 11

54

Shippers

Shippers can claim LETS only for the amount of transport activity actually conducted to generate the 
LETS or that could have been conducted by the shipper’s carriers or through the shipper’s LSPs.

A shipper may claim the profile of either a bundled (see Figure 12) or unbundled (see Figure 13) 
solution from a solution provider. If the shipper claims the profile of either a bundled or unbundled 
solution, the shipper may report emissions based on the solution’s profile towards its own GHG 
emission footprint.

Figure 12. Bundled booking

Emitter Proﬁle and 
Supply Chain Proﬁle

Book

Claim

A shipper claims the bundled booking from the solution provider and applies the solution proﬁle to their own emission footprint.

Supply Chain Proﬁle to Shipper Inventory

Figure 13. Unbundled booking

Emitter Proﬁle

Claim

or

Retire

A carrier claiming the emitter proﬁle of the unbundled booking 
can apply the emitter proﬁle to their own emission footprint. 
The carrier cannot book a LETS based on that proﬁle for claiming 
by a Shipper or Forwarder.

If no carrier is found, the emitter proﬁle is retired by the 
solution provider.

Book

Supply Chain Proﬁle

Claim

Supply Chain Proﬁle 
to Shipper Inventory

Shipper claims unbundled booking and applies the
solution proﬁle to their own emission footprint.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 11

55

Declaring different GHG emission information 
to different stakeholders

When an organization books the GHG emission profile of LETS and that profile is claimed by 
another organization, the booking organization may need to report GHG emission intensity 
information differently in their GLEC Declaration to External Stakeholders and in their GLEC 
Business to Business Declarations (for more on these different types of declarations, see the 
GLEC Framework (10))17.

For example, Carrier A has two customers, Shipper 1 and Shipper 2. Carrier A generates a 
LETS over the span of a reporting period. Carrier A books the emission profile of the LETS. 
Shipper 1 claims the LETS emission profile. Shipper 2 does not claim any of the LETS emis-
sion profile.

When reporting on GHG emissions, Carrier A’s: 

• GLEC Declaration to External Stakeholders, as captured in Carrier A’s annual sustainability  
  report, will show an overall average transport emission intensity resulting from transport  
  activity associated with the LETS as well as transport activity not associated with LETS. 

• GLEC Business to Business Declaration to Shipper 1 will include a transport emission 
  intensity that is lower than the emission intensity shown in Carrier A’s Declaration to  
  External Stakeholders. The Declaration to Shipper 1 includes the effect of the LETS,  
  and less of the effect of non LETS transport activity than is reflected in the Declaration to    
  External Stakeholders. 

• GLEC Business to Business Declaration to Shipper 2 will include a transport emission  
  intensity that is higher than the emission intensity shown in Carrier A’s Declaration to  
  External Stakeholders. The Declaration to Shipper 2 represents the emission intensity of  
  transport activity not associated with the LETS.

Because an organization may report different transport emission intensities in a GLEC 
Declaration to External Stakeholders and in its GLEC Business to Business Declarations, 
it is important for the reporting organization to be clear about the appropriate uses of the 
intensity information provided in each type of declaration. As such, organizations that book 
the emission profile of LETS for claiming by specific organizations (i.e., the profile of the 
LETS is not provided to all of the booking organization’s customers equally) may include a 
statement in their GLEC Declarations as follows.

17  The framework described in this document builds on GHG emission calculations as described in the GLEC Framework. GHG emission reporting consistent with the GLEC 
Framework (e.g., the GLEC Declaration to External Stakeholders and the GLEC Business to Business Declaration) continues to represent the foundation for organizational 
freight GHG emission reporting. The GLEC Framework is supplemented, not replaced, by the principles provided in this document.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 11

56

Business to business declaration

The GLEC Business to Business Declaration can include a statement that reads:

“

The greenhouse gas emission intensity information 
presented here reflects calculations that account for allocation 
of low emission transport activity to selected customers. 
The emission intensity here applies to your organization 
directly and may be different from emission intensity 
information in other public or general reporting. Please use 
the greenhouse gas emission intensity information 
presented here for transportation activity associated with our 
organization in your greenhouse gas emission calculations.

“

Declaration to external stakeholders

One approach to transparency about use of GHG emission intensity information provided 
in external stakeholder declarations is to clarify that the average intensity is not meant for 
organization-specific use. For example:

“

The greenhouse gas emission intensity information presented 
here reflects calculations that account for allocation of 
low emission transport activity to selected customers. The 
emission intensity presented here is therefore not appropriate 
for use in customer specific greenhouse gas emission 
calculations. Customers are encouraged to contact us 
directly for information on the emission intensity appropriate 
for use in their greenhouse gas emission calculations for 
transportation activity associated with our organization.

“

 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 11

57

Another approach to transparency about the use of emission intensity information provided 
in external stakeholder declarations is to clarify that the average intensity is not meant for 
organization-specific use and to provide an alternative emission intensity. For example:

“

The greenhouse gas emission intensity information 
presented here reflects calculations that account for 
allocation of low emission transport activity to selected 
customers. The emission intensity presented here is 
therefore not appropriate for use in customer specific 
greenhouse gas emission calculations. Unless we have 
provided your organization directly with greenhouse gas 
emission intensity information, please assume a 
greenhouse gas emission intensity of [insert emission 
intensity] for transportation activity associated with our 
organization in your greenhouse gas emission calculations.

“

Additional considerations regarding 
GHG emission information declarations

Third party verifiers of emission declarations are encouraged to assess these declarations to 
ensure that the declarations are transparent, not only in situations where a booking organization 
must report GHG emission intensity information differently in their GLEC Declaration to External 
Stakeholders and in their GLEC Business to Business Declarations, but also with respect to 
transparency about additionality of solutions. See, in particular, the section regarding additionality 
and cross modal opt-in schemes in Section 6.

Determining the emission profile of non LETS activity

Organizations that report different GHG emission profiles to different stakeholders may need to 
calculate emission information for transportation activity that: 

• Includes the effect of LETS for some stakeholders. 

• Does not include the effect of LETS for other stakeholders.

The section above on calculating the emission profile of a LETS provides steps to determine GHG 
emission information for transportation activity associated with LETS. Emission information for 
transportation activity not associated with LETS can be calculated based on two approaches, one 
using primary data and the other using secondary data18. As described in the GLEC Framework, 
the use of primary data is preferred over the use of secondary data wherever practicable.

18  As used here, the term “secondary data” includes either modelled or default emission intensity values for the non-LETS transport activity.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 11

58

Primary data

Some organizations may have primary data to use in calculating emission information to provide 
to customers that have not claimed the emission profile of a LETS.

For example, an ocean container carrier operates most of its fleet on MGO and purchases low 
emission marine fuel for a selection of voyages. The carrier books the LETS generated through 
the use of the low emission marine fuel and a selection of specific shippers and LSPs claim the 
profile of the LETS. The carrier needs to report on its emission intensity to other customers who 
did not claim the profile of the LETS.

The carrier may use actual data on voyages not associated with the LETS to determine the 
emission profile of its non-LETS transportation. This emission profile can be provided to 
customers that did not claim the LETS emission profiles.

Secondary data

Many organizations may not know the actual emission profile of transportation activity not 
conducted in association with a LETS. These organizations can use secondary information for 
the activity most likely replaced by the LETS.

For example, an LSP is responsible for securing 10,000,000 tonne km of road freight 
transportation activity for its customers. The LSP purchases the GHG emission profile for 
1,000,000 tonne km of electric truck LETS and calculates and allocates the emission profile of 
the electric trucking as described in Section 10 above.

The LSP does not have carrier data for the remaining 9,000,000 tonne km of transportation 
activity. The LSP assigns the appropriate emission intensities from the GLEC Framework to this 
9,000,000 tonne km of transport activity.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

59

Conclusion

12

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

60

Conclusion

The challenge of decarbonizing heavy transportation is not an easy one to overcome. 
However, this challenge must be overcome if organizations with heavy transportation 
GHG emission footprints are to contribute meaningfully to the rapid acceleration of 
decarbonization required for the achievement of global climate goals. Heavy transport 
decarbonization can be accelerated by mechanisms to share the cost of decarbonization 
across LSPs, shippers, and carriers and by mechanisms that increase access to LETS for 
LSPs, shippers, and carriers.

Cost sharing and increased access can be enabled by a framework that: 

• Permits a purchaser of freight transportation services to contribute to and report the benefits from   
LETS, even if those LETS do not directly involve the transportation assets that physically transport    
their freight.

• Permits a provider of freight transportation services or a provider of a low emission transportation   
  solution to allocate the emission profile of the solution or LETS to the organizations that contribute  
  to the emission abatement cost, even if those organizations’ freight is not always transported  
  using the LETS or solution.

• Is consistent with established freight transportation GHG accounting methods.

This document describes a framework based on a book and claim chain of custody approach to 
meet these needs.

While the framework outlined here can help facilitate transport decarbonization, this framework 
is only one of a many tools to bring decarbonized heavy transportation to scale. Different tools 
and requirements address other pieces of the voluntary freight decarbonization challenge. And 
of course, beyond voluntary action, robust regulatory requirements for heavy transportation 
decarbonization can create a level playing field for carriers generating LETS and reduce the need for 
reliance on voluntary collaboration schemes to avoid the worst impacts of climate change.

It also bears noting that this framework, like other tools to scale freight transportation 
decarbonization, will likely evolve as it is implemented by organizations and as the framework’s 
strengths and weaknesses are revealed in practice.

The need for freight transportation decarbonization is hard to dispute. The barriers to achieving this 
decarbonization are real but they are not insurmountable. There is no time to waste. The remaining 
carbon budget for a 1.5°C world is quickly dwindling and “now is the only time there ever is to do a 
thing” (11).

 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Section 12

61

Annexes

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Annexes

62

Annex 1 
Applying the framework 
to the mail and parcel sector

The GLEC Framework identifies the mail and parcel sector as a sector that warrants special 
guidance regarding GHG emission inventory calculations. Unique characteristics of the mail 
and parcel sector, as described in the GLEC Framework, are also relevant to the accounting 
framework outlined in this document.

For example, in mail and parcel networks, there are a large number of individual shipments, 
many of these shipments being small volume consignments. A dynamic mix of modes and 
routes is applied to transport these individual consignments from their point of origin to their final 
destination. As such, it is not always possible to: 

• Predict which route (and the mix of modes to be used on that route) an individual consignment  
  will take through a mail and parcel network.

• Determine, after a shipment has occurred, which route an individual consignment actually took  
  through a mail and parcel network.

Because of these characteristics of mail and parcel networks, it is often not practicable to 
calculate mail and parcel transport activity as defined in Section 10 (i.e., mass or volume of freight 
multiplied by the distance that mass or volume of freight was transported).

Instead, the GLEC Framework outlines a process for calculating mail and parcel GHG emissions 
based on the number of consignments (items) processed through a mail and parcel network. 
Under the GLEC Framework, the emissions associated with a specific shipment are calculated 
by dividing the total mail and parcel network emissions by the total number of items processed 
through the network during a defined period of time.

The example in this Annex describes a way of applying the GHG emission calculation methods 
outlined in Section 10 to a mail and parcel network, considering the GLEC Framework approach 
to mail and parcel networks.

Example: Biogas and Heat Pumps in a Mail and Parcel Network

A mail and parcel network operator wants to apply the emission profile of heat pumps powered 
by renewable electricity and trucks powered by biogas towards the emission footprint of letters 
processed through the operator’s sorting facilities and road transport operations on behalf of a 
specific shipper.

Step 1

The mail and parcel network operator transported one billion letters during a one-year emission 
reporting period.

The shipper (i.e., the shipper whose letters will be allocated the emission profile of the heat pumps 
and biogas) shipped ten million letters19 through the mail and parcel network operator’s network 
during the one-year emission reporting period.

19  Provided that the shipper only used the mail and parcel network operator described in this example, ten million letters 
serves as the equivalent of the mail and parcel transport activity constraint for this shipper during the reporting period.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Annexes

63

Step 2

While mail and parcel tracking technologies are rapidly improving, the mail and parcel network 
operator does not yet have the ability to calculate item-level emissions based on the characteristics 
of a specific shipment.

Instead, the mail and parcel network operator calculates its total network GHG emissions for the 
reporting period based on primary data collected from the operator’s activities. The total network 
emissions for the reporting period are 500,000,000 kg CO2e. Spread across ten billion shipments, 
this emission footprint equates to 50 g CO2e per shipment:

500,000,000 kg CO2e

10,000,000,000 Shipments

50=

g CO2e/

Item

This 50 g CO2e per item emission intensity is based on an emission footprint (500,000,000 kg 
CO2e) that does not include biogas trucking or heat pump utilization. That is, the emission intensity 
represents operations before the mail and parcel network operator applied the biogas and heat 
pump solutions in its network. In subsequent reporting periods, the “baseline” emission footprint 
used to calculate the per shipment emission intensity:

• Will not change based on the influence of biogas trucking or renewable electricity heat pumps  
  in logistics sites. The “baseline” emission footprint will be calculated as if the biogas trucks were 
  operated as conventional fuel trucks, and as if logistics sites heating was provided by conventional  
  heating systems. 

• May change as general efficiency or other variables in the mail and parcel network operator’s 
  network change. For example, if changes in asset utilization, asset routing, or modal mix impact  
  the overall emission intensity of the mail and parcel network’s operations, this impact will be 
  reflected in a revised baseline for each reporting period.

The mail and parcel network operator has determined that the 50 g CO2e per item emission 
intensity, as it applies to the shipper, is associated with two modes of transport as follows: 

• 40 g CO2e per item from road transport 

• 10 g CO2e per item from logistics sites20 

As such, the shipper’s mode-specific21 emission footprints for the reporting period 
are as follows:

10,000,000 Items ×

40 g CO2e

/

Item Road

= 400,000 kg CO2e Road

10,000,000 Items ×

10 g CO2e

/

Item Logistics  Sites

= 100,000 CO2e Logistics Sites

  20  These emissions are comprised entirely of emissions associated with heating the logistics sites.
  21  TOC-specific emissions could also be applied, if available. See Section 7.

 
 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Annexes

64

These emission footprints may be converted to a mass or volume of energy based on GHG 
emission factors22. The shipper’s share of energy consumption in the mail and parcel network 
operator’s network is 126,183 L of diesel and 416,667 kWh of natural gas:

400,000,kg CO2e Road
/

CO2e

L Diesel

3.17 kg

100,000 kg CO2e Logistics Sites
/
CO2e

0.24 kg

kWh Natural Gas

=  126,183 L Diesel

= 416,667 kWh Natural Gas

These shares of energy consumption can be converted to a number of mode-specific assets:

• 126,183 L of diesel equates to seven diesel truck-years. This calculation is based on data    
  collected by the mail and parcel network operator on their network that shows each truck in 
  the network traveling an average of 58,909 km each year, and each truck consuming an  
  average of 0.306 L diesel per km23.

58,909

km

/

Truck Year

× 0.306 L Diesel

/

km

= 18,026

L Diesel

/

Truck Year

126,183 L Diesel

18,026

L Diesel

/

Truck Year

=  7 Truck Year

• 416,667 kWh of natural gas equates to 15 logistics site-years of heating capacity, based
  on data collected by the mail and parcel network operator on their network that shows each  
  logistics site consumes an average of 27,000 kWh of heating energy per year.

416,667 kWh

          kWh Heating Energy
27,000

/

Site Year

= 15 Site Years

22  The appropriate emission factor to apply in these calculations could be taken from the GLEC Framework.
23  The averages applied in these calculations must be realistic representations of the mail and parcel network into which the low 
emissions assets or activities are introduced.

 
Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Annexes

65

Step 3

The mail and parcel network operator replaces seven diesel trucks with biogas trucks and 
replaces gas heating units at 15 logistics sites with heat pumps powered by renewable electricity.

The mail and parcel network operator’s fuel utilization data shows that the biogas trucks emit 
a total of 60,000 kg CO2e over the reporting period. These emissions equate to 15% of the 
emissions from the diesel trucks that the biogas trucks replaced:

18,026

L Diesel

/

Truck Year

× 3.17 kg CO2e
/

L Diesel

× 7 Trucks = 399,997 kg CO2e

60,000 kg CO2e

399,997 kg CO2e 

= 15%

Use of the heat pumps is associated with 5,900 kg CO2e over the reporting period, or 6% of 
the emissions generated by the natural gas-consuming heating units that the heat pumps 
replaced (the heat pumps are powered by renewable electricity with an emission factor of 
14.1 g CO2e per kWh):

27,000

kWh

/

Site Year

× 0.24 kg CO2e
/

kWh Natural Gas

×15 Sites = 97,200 kg CO2e

5,900 kg CO2e

97,200 kg CO2e 

= 6%

These emissions percentages can then be applied to the per shipment emission intensity 
of the shipper:

40g

CO2e
/

Shipment Road

× 15% = 6g CO2e
/

Shipment Road

10g

CO2e
/

Shipment Logistics Sites

+ 6% = 0.6g CO2e
/

Shipment Logistics Sites

The shipper’s emission footprint is therefore 66,000,000 g CO2e:

6g

CO2e

/

Shipment Road

+ 

0.6g CO2e
/

Shipment Logistics Sites

=

6.6g CO2e 
/

Shipment Total

6.6g

CO2e
/

Shipment Total

× 10,000,000 Shipments = 66,000,000 g CO2e

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Annexes

66

Annex 2
Glossary

Additionality: A criterion for assessing whether 
a solution or a low emission transportation 
service are required by regulation.

Energy Intensity: The amount of energy 
consumed in conducting a certain amount of 
transportation activity.

Book: The process of recording the 
characteristics of a solution or a low emission 
transportation service in a system for tracking 
these characteristics. A registry is an example of 
such a system.

Bundled Booking: A booking in which 
a solution provider books two sets of 
characteristics together with each other, the 
emitter’s emission profile and the supply chain 
emission profile.

Carrier: An organization that operates 
transportation assets to conduct transportation 
activity in providing transportation services.

Chain of Custody System: A set of measures 
underlying the process by which materials or 
products (and information on those materials 
or products) are transferred, monitored, and 
controlled as they move through each step in a 
supply chain.

Claim: The process of securing the 
characteristics of a solution or a low emission 
transportation service from a system for tracking 
these characteristics. A registry is an example of 
such a system.

Direct Generation of a Low Emission 
Transportation Service: Conducting a 
transportation service using a low emission 
solution, where a physical tie can be established 
between the solution and the carrier generating 
the low emission transportation service. That 
is, the carrier generating the LETS actually uses 
or deploys the low emission solution in that 
carrier’s owned or operated fleet.

Greenhouse Gas Emission Intensity: The 
amount of greenhouse gas emissions generated 
for a certain amount of transport activity.

Greenhouse Gas Emission Factor: The mass 
of greenhouse gasses emitted per unit of energy 
consumed.

Indirect Generation of a Low Emission 
Transportation Service: Generation of a low 
emission transportation service by a carrier, 
shipper, or LSP that calculates the transportation 
service’s emissions footprint as if a low emission 
solution was used in their owned-operated fleet 
(carriers) or by the carriers in their supply chain 
(shippers and forwarders). In indirect generation 
scenarios, a physical tie cannot be made 
between a low emission solution and the low 
emission transportation service.

Logistics Service Provider (LSP): An 
organization that secures and facilitates 
transportation activity for shippers. LSPs, 
as defined here, do not operate their own 
transportation assets or conduct transportation 
activity. Instead, LSPs hire carriers to transport 
the LSPs’ customers’ freight. Note that some 
LSPs operate transportation assets. In these 
cases, the LSP would also be a carrier.

Product: An article or substance that is 
manufactured or refined for sale. A fuel is an 
example of a product.

Registry: A tool to register and track the transfer 
of the characteristics of a solution or service 
according to a transparent and verifiable registry 
standard.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Annexes

67

Service: A piece of work done for a client or 
customer that does not involve manufacturing 
or producing goods. Transporting freight, or 
arranging the transportation of freight, are 
examples of services.

Shipper: An organization with freight that 
needs transportation. A shipper may retain 
a logistics service provider to arrange 
transportation of the shipper’s freight. A shipper 
may also directly contract with carriers for 
freight transportation activity.

Solution: A product to decarbonize heavy 
transport. One example of a solution is a low 
emission fuel. Another example of a solution 
is a low emission transportation asset like an 
electric truck.

Solution Provider: An organization that 
provides a low emission material or product to 
the transportation market. Solution providers 
do not conduct transportation activity, nor 
do they contract for transportation activity on 
behalf of their customers. Instead, solution 
providers provide the materials or assets that 
make a low emission transportation service 
possible. One example of a solution provider is 
a supplier of a low emission fuel.

Sustainability Certification System: A tool 
to establish and track the sustainability profile 
of a fuel (including the fuel’s greenhouse gas 
emission factor).

Transportation Activity: The product of the 
amount of freight transported and the distance 
that freight was transported.

Transportation Operation Category (TOC): A 
group of transportation operations with similar 
characteristics (e.g., transportation asset type 
and size, load factor, or geography of operation) 
that correspond to how transportation services 
are provided and procured.

Transportation Service: A certain amount of 
mode-specific (or transport operation category-
specific) transportation activity.

Unbundled Booking: A booking in which a 
solution provider books the emitter profile of 
a solution and the supply chain profile of that 
solution separately.

Voluntary Market Based Measures Framework for Logistics Emissions Accounting and Reporting | Annexes

68

Annex 3
References

1. ITF. ITF Transport Outlook 2021. Paris: 
OECD Publishing, 2021.

2. Energy Transitions Commission. Mission 
Possible: Reaching Net-Zero Carbon Emissions 
from Harder-to-Abate Sectors by Mid-Century. 
2018.

3. World Economic Forum. Supply Chain & 
Transport industry statement of support for 
Green Demand Alliances and a Book & Claims 
Standard to accelerate decarbonization of the 
freight industry. 2021.

4. Roundtable on Sustainable Biomaterials. 
Book & Claim. [Online] 2023. https://rsb.org/
book-claim/.

5. —. RSB Book & Claim Manual. 2023.

6. International Organization for 
Standardization. International Standard 22095, 
Chain of Custody - General Terminology and 
Models. 2020.

7. World Resources Institute and World 
Business Council for Sustainable 
Development. The Greenhouse Gas Protocol: 
A Corporate Accounting and Reporting 
Standard. 2004.

8. International Civil Aviation Organization. 
Annex 16 to the Convention on International Civil 
Aviation. 2018. Vols. IV, Carbon Offsetting and 
Reduction Scheme for International Aviation.

9. International Council on Clean 
Transportation. CO2 Emission from Commercial 
Aviation: 2013, 2018, and 2019. 2020.

10. Smart Freight Centre. Global Logistics 
Emissions Council Framework for Logistics 
Emissions Accounting and Reporting. 2019.

11. Stowe, Harriet Beecher. Uncle Tom’s Cabin. 
1852.

12. World Resources Institute and 
World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development. Greenhouse Gas Protocol 
Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Standard. 
2011.

13. Energy Transitions Commission. 
Bioresources within a Net-Zero Emissions 
Economy: Making a Sustainable Approach 
Possible. 2021.

