End-to-End GHG
Reporting of Logistics  
Operations
Guidance 

January 2023

Smart Freight
Centre

Led by Smart Freight Centre

2

© Smart Freight Centre and WBCSD, 2023 
Suggested citation: Smart Freight Centre & WBCSD 
(2023), End-to-End GHG Reporting Guidance

Freight Centre does not guarantee the accuracy of the 
data included in this publication and does not accept 
responsibility for consequence of their use.

This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part 
in any form for educational or nonprofit purposes 
without special permission from the copyright holder, 
provided acknowledgment of the source is made. Smart 
Freight Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of any 
publication that uses this report as a source. No use of 
this publication may be made for resale or for any other 
commercial purpose whatsoever, without prior 
permission in writing from Smart Freight Centre.

Disclaimer
The views expressed in this publication are those of 
Smart Freight Centre and staff, consultants, and 
management, and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of the Board of Trustees of Smart Freight Centre. Smart 

Acknowledgements
This Guidance was written jointly by Smart Freight 
Centre and WBCSD, supported by the World Economic 
Forum. McKinsey Sustainability is the knowledge 
partner for this effort providing analytical insights and 
advisory guidance.

The authors wish to thank the over 30 partners from 
across the logistics industry, representing shippers, 
logistics service providers, carriers, and technology 
solution providers who collaborated on the 
development of the Guidance as well as all external 
reviewers for their valuable insights, expertise, and 
contributions.

Participants and contributors 

Knowledge partner 

Scaling partner

End-to-End GHG Reporting of Logistics Operations - Guidance 3

About Smart Freight Centre
Smart Freight Centre is an international non-profit 
organization focused on reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions from freight transportation. Smart Freight 
Centre’s vision is an efficient and zero-emission global 
logistics sector. Smart Freight Centre’s mission is to 
collaborate with the organization’s global partners to 
quantify impacts, identify solutions, and propagate 
logistics decarbonization strategies. Smart Freight 
Centre’s goal is to guide the global logistics industry in 
tracking and reducing the industry’s greenhouse gas 
emissions by one billion metric tons by 2030 and to 
reach zero emissions by 2050 or earlier, consistent with 
a 1.5°C future.

About GLEC 
The Global Logistics Emissions Council (GLEC) was 
established in 2014. GLEC has grown into a voluntary 
partnership of more than 150 companies, industry 
associations, programs, experts and other organiza-
tions dedicated to driving widespread, transparent, and 
consistent calculation and reporting of logistics GHG 
emissions. GLEC works to identify common problems, 
remove barriers and above all, share a conviction that 
emission reduction in freight is urgent. GLEC members 
developed the GLEC Framework to offer multinationals 
and their suppliers a harmonized, efficient and trans-
parent way to calculate and report logistics emissions. 
GLEC is a Smart Freight Centre-led initiative.

About WBCSD 
The World Business Council for Sustainable  
Development (WBCSD) is the premier global, CEO-led 
community of over 200 of the world’s leading sustainable 
businesses working collectively to accelerate the 
system transformations needed for a net zero, nature 
positive, and more equitable future. Our member 
companies come from all business sectors and all 
major economies, representing a combined revenue  
of more than $8.5 trillion and 19 million employees.  
Our global network of almost 70 national business 
councils gives our members unparalleled reach across 
the globe. Together, we are the leading voice of business 

for sustainability, united by our vision of a world in 
which 9+ billion people are living well, within planetary 
boundaries, by mid-century.

About PACT 
The Partnership for Carbon Transparency (PACT) is 
seeking to accelerate decarbonization through the 
creation of transparency on product-level emissions in 
the value chain. To achieve this, it provides a forum for 
stakeholders to jointly tackle this challenge, uniting 
businesses from across industries, technology players, 
industry-focused initiatives, standard-setting bodies, 
reporting organizations, and regulators in their shared 
mission. Jointly, the PACT community defines and 
publishes the necessary methodological and techno- 
logical basis for primary emissions data exchange, 
integrating existing standards and approaches and 
creating a trusted and holistic foundation. PACT is 
hosted by the WBCSD.

Contact

Smart Freight Centre
Keizersgracht 560  
1017 EM, Amsterdam, Netherlands
P.O. Box 11772  
1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405
www.smartfreightcentre.org
info@smartfreightcentre.org

WBCSD
Avenue du Bouchet 2B  
1209 Geneva, Switzerland
Tel: +41 (22) 839 3100
www.wbcsd.org
www.carbon-transparency.com
Follow us on Twitter and LinkedIn

End-to-End GHG Reporting of Logistics Operations - Guidance  
 
Contents

Introduction  
  1.1  Setting the stage  
  1.2  Objectives  
  1.3  Approach  
  1.4  Structure of the Guidance  
  1.5  Scope of the Guidance  

Data requirements and definitions  
  2.1  Definitions and concepts  
  2.2  Data considerations  
  2.3  Data variables  
  2.4  Data exchange  
  2.5  Adopting a new data structure  

Performance indicators and data quality  
  3.1  Logistics GHG emissions performance indicators  
  3.2  Evaluating input data quality for GHG calculation  

Calculation guidance: Using primary data  
  4.1  Introduction: Calculation with primary data  
  4.2  Calculation without primary data (per mode)  

Assurance and verification  
  5.1  Objectives and scope  
  5.2  Assurance ambition levels  
  5.3  Requirements for SMEs  
  5.4  Evidence  
  5.5  Process and reporting  

How to: Supplier-to-customer end-to-end GHG reporting 
  6.1  Overarching tips  
  6.2  Example  
  6.3  Reporting/declaration of emissions  

Outlook  

1

2

3
4
5

6
7

4

8
9
9
9
10
10

11
12
13
14
16
17

18
19
19

23
24
29

34
35
36
40
40
41

43
44
44
47

48

End-to-End GHG Reporting of Logistics Operations - Guidance  
Contents

Tables 
  Table 1: Crucial definitions for concepts of logistics GHG emissions accounting 
  Table 2: Use cases and respective requirements 
  Table 3: Variables to be considered for the data collection and exchange  

of GHG data on a TCE level 
  Table 4: Data quality indicator at a TOC level 
  Table 5: Data quality indicator at a TCE level 
  Table 6: Recommended road freight TOC characteristics 
  Table 7: Recommended sea freight TOC characteristics 
  Table 8. Recommended inland waterways TOC characteristics 
  Table 9: Recommended air freight TOC characteristics 
  Table 10: Recommended rail freight TOC characteristics 
  Table 11: Recommended logistics site HOC characteristics 
  Table 12: Assurance levels overview 
  Table 13: Assurance levels comparison 
  Table 14. Example calculation of an end-to-end supply chain 

Figures 
  Figure 1: Steps to calculate emissions 
  Figure 2: Structure of the Guidance 
  Figure 3: Example of a transport chain, TCE, and TOC 
  Figure 4: Flowchart representing the calculating and reporting steps 
  Figure 5: Example transport chain 
  Figure 6: Road freight flowchart for calculation 
  Figure 7: Sea freight flowchart for calculation 
  Figure 8: Ambition levels and dimensions of the assurance requirements 
  Figure 9: Example of an end-to-end supply chain 
  Figure 10: Example transport chain with reporting requirements 

5

12 
13

15
20
20
30
31
32
32
33
33
37
39
45

7
10
12
24
25
29
31
36
44
47

End-to-End GHG Reporting of Logistics Operations - Guidance  
 
 
6

Executive Summary

Action on logistics emissions is needed but the 
transparency challenge needs to be resolved first
To limit global warming and reach the Paris Agreement 
climate targets, supply chains need to be decarbonized. 
Logistics operations are a central part of all supply 
chains and play a crucial role in achieving the 
necessary emissions reductions across industries. 
Companies are therefore under increasing pressure to 
calculate, monitor, and report their emissions from 
logistics operations. 

However, companies face an emissions transparency 
challenge: a lack of granular, verifiable, and consistent 
emissions data from logistics operations. While 
standards like the Global Logistics Emissions Council 
(GLEC) Framework and forthcoming ISO 14083 provide 
guidance on how to calculate emissions from logistics 
operations, many businesses face data quality and 
availability difficulties, particularly for complex logistics 
operations. This Guidance therefore seeks to enable 
organizations to understand greenhouse gas (GHG) 
logistics emissions incurred from supplier to end 
customer, end-to-end, by increasing the consistency 
and quality of data, clarifying how and when to use 
primary data and creating performance indicators that 
businesses can use in their decision-making.

This Guidance establishes core principles for 
logistics emissions disclosures
To limit global warming and reach the Paris Agreement 
This Guidance is based on several core principles:

1

2

3

Providing a step-by-step practical approach to 
calculate logistics emissions end-to-end – from 
an initial supplier to a final customer – compliant 
with existing methodologies. 

Reflecting reality and organizational use cases to 
ensure solutions can be embedded today in daily 
practices for reporting and reducing logistics 
emissions. 

Creating logic for ambition levels that encourage 
companies to improve data granularity, quality, 
and reliability over time.

Companies can take concrete steps to prepare to 
calculate logistics emissions
Companies wishing to calculate logistic operations 
emissions should begin by defining the use case for 
their emissions disclosures, such as reporting, 
business decision-making, or granular optimization. 
The use case will inform which data the reporting 
company should collect, at what level the data should 
be collected (company, transport chain, or transport-
chain element), and which data attributes will need to 
be shared with the stakeholders that will use the 
emissions data. While this Guidance provides an 
overview of the minimum data attributes to be shared, 
companies should align with their data users to ensure 
that every involved party understands the shared 
emissions data. 

As a second step, companies should define which 
metrics they are going to calculate, disclose, and 
monitor. This Guidance suggests four required metrics 
for any emissions logistics disclosure on a transport-
chain element basis: 

Metrics measuring emissions
• Absolute well-to-wheel (WTW) emissions
• Emission intensity per ton-kilometer (tkm) or tonnes.1

Metrics measuring data quality
• Data quality indicator with the conforming use case.

This approach enables both emissions and data quality 
transparency, thus facilitating data users’ 
understanding of any possible data limitations and 
unlocking data quality improvements over time.

Companies should prioritize primary data in their 
calculations where feasible
To calculate end-to-end emissions from logistics 
operations, this Guidance details different approaches 
depending on the available data. If primary data is 
available, companies should follow the steps below: 

1 In case of containerized maritime transport, this can be expressed in twenty-foot equivalents (TEUs) and for mail and parcel,  

this can be expressed per item.

End-to-End GHG Reporting of Logistics Operations - Guidance  
7

Figure 1: Steps to calculate emissions

Repeat end-to-end

1

Set boundaries 
and goals

2

Define TOC 
emission 
intensity value

3

Calculate 
emissions 
at TCE

4

Verify and 
validate your 
calculation

5

Report 
and use

A
B

Map and 
collect data

Calculate TCE 
emissions

A
B
C
D

Map and 
collect data

Determine Fuel
Emission Factor

Calculate total 
emissions of TOC

Calculate emission 
intensity of TOC

Requires input from 
Transport Operator

However, in many cases, primary data will not be 
available. Companies may therefore refer to modeled  
or default data to calculate logistics emissions. If 
secondary data is used, the applicable steps depend  
on the transportation mode and the extent to which 
individual primary data points may be available. The 
Guidance therefore introduces a decision tree for each 
transportation mode to help companies undertake 
calculations using the best available data. The newly 
introduced data quality indicator provides the user with 
an understanding of the quality of the input data used  
to calculate the emissions.

Assurance and verification are crucial to establish 
trust in emissions disclosures
Finally, companies seeking to share logistics emissions 
data should ensure rigorous assurance and verification 
to increase trust in and reliability of the data. This 
Guidance defines three ambition levels around 
assurance and verification, depending on the data 
user’s needs and the reporting company’s readiness:

• Bronze: a minimum level of assurance providing a 

baseline of trust in shared emissions data

• Silver: an intermediate level of assurance increasing 
the granularity and scope of the assured emissions 
data

• Gold: a North Star ambition level for logistics 

emissions assurance, providing strong trust in the 
exchanged emissions data.

Over time, companies are encouraged to increase the 
assurance ambition level to reach assurance practices 

similar to that of financial data, requiring regular 
assurance to ensure a reasonable level of confidence. 
Nevertheless, companies may choose the assurance 
ambition level that best suits their objectives, as long 
as companies transparently communicate what level of 
verification is associated with the shared emissions data. 

Collaboration and adaptability will be central to 
scaling up logistics emissions disclosures and 
ensuring ecosystem convergence
This Guidance was developed in a collaborative effort 
between GLEC, hosted by Smart Freight Centre, and the 
Partnership for Carbon Transparency (PACT), hosted by 
the World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development (WBCSD), as part of a wider effort to 
increase transparency on (primary) emissions data 
across supply chains. It is the result of a collaborative 
development process, gathering input from 30 
stakeholders in the logistics industry, representing 
shippers, logistics service providers (LSPs), carriers, 
and technology solution providers. While this Guidance 
constitutes a best effort toward supporting companies’ 
calculation journeys, the evolving data-capture 
technology and decarbonization landscape will require 
all logistics stakeholders to adapt the best available 
approaches as they change over time. Similarly, as the 
emissions disclosure ecosystem grows, collaboration 
and exchange will become ever more important. All 
logistics stakeholders are encouraged to foster 
methodological alignment across the logistics industry, 
ensuring that the industry “speaks the same language” 
and collectively unlocks the required decarbonization 
transformation. 

End-to-End GHG Reporting of Logistics Operations - Guidance 1. Introduction

1. Introduction

1.1 Setting the stage
There is a mutual understanding: to reach 2050 climate 
goals it is essential that supply chains are decarbonized. 
A core prerequisite is the availability of high-quality 
emission-related data at the point of decision-making. 
With more granular and consistent data on activity and 
energy use, organizations can better measure actual 
emissions and use this to design, monitor, and adjust 
decarbonization strategies.

The Global Logistics Emissions Council (GLEC)  
Framework and the forthcoming ISO 14083 standard 
are supporting organizations on the journey toward 
supply chain emissions transparency, setting international 
recognized methodological standards on how to calculate 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from logistics opera-
tions. However, companies still experience challenges: 
a lack of emission-related data, uncertainty about the 
approach to take when this is the case, and complexity 
arising from the use of different technologies.

To address these challenges and help create greater 
transparency on emissions, Smart Freight Centre, and 
World Business Council for Sustainable Development 
(WBCSD) started a collaborative project with the 
ultimate goal of defining more detailed guidance on 
how to calculate GHG emissions from freight transport. 
This Guidance advances and builds on existing method-
ologies with the aim of increasing consistency and 
clarity of different calculation approaches across a 
complete supply chain from end-to-end. This Guidance 
delivers a clear methodology for calculating emissions 
from a multimodal supply chain and provides a  
framework to assess input data quality and assurance 
of the results.

This project is part of a wider effort to increase trans-
parency on (primary) emissions data across supply 
chains, known as the Partnership for Carbon Transparency 
(PACT), which is hosted by WBCSD.

1.2 Objectives
This Guidance aims to enable organizations to understand 
the GHG logistics emissions incurred from supplier to 
end customer. 

Specifically, the objectives of this Guidance are to:

9

• Increase the consistency and quality of data to enable 

better comparability of logistics GHG emissions

• Clarify how and when to use primary data across 

end-to-end logistics supply chains

• Create performance indicators to be used in  

procurement processes.

This Guidance builds on a series of existing standards 
and guidance to help organizations quantify and reduce 
emissions from logistics operations. This Guidance is 
explicitly designed to complement the GLEC Framework 
and the Pathfinder Framework (developed by PACT) on 
questions such as the operational application of 
emissions quantification in logistics, the quality of data, 
and assurance requirements. In version 3 of the GLEC 
Framework, the newly introduced concepts of this 
Guidance will be reflected. 

Other standards referenced and recognized in the 
design of this Guidance are:

• ISO14083:2023 (forthcoming) for details on the 

quantification and reporting of logistics emissions

• EN17837:2023 (forthcoming) for details on the mail 

and parcel sector

• AFNOR Spec X43-072 for operationalization of the 

calculations

• Clean Cargo methods for containerized maritime 

transport

• GLEC Low Emission Fuels and Vehicles Work for 

additional guidance on emission factors

• GLEC Data Access for Logistics Emissions Accounting 

and Reporting for the data model requirements.

1.3 Approach
This Guidance has been developed in collaboration  
with over 30 partners from across the logistics industry, 
representing shippers, logistics service providers 
(LSPs), carriers, and technology solution providers. 
Each partner was invited to share a use case for an 
end-to-end logistics supply chain and identify core 
challenges faced in reporting GHG. On this basis,  
ten workshops were conducted to discuss the main 
challenges. Together, we identified the following  
five challenges: 

1 Introduction 
10

• Reporting emissions at the level required by customers 

(e.g., product, parcel, pallet, and unit of sale)

• Reporting from network operations

• Data visibility for road, sea, air, and rail transportation 

services operated by third-party subcontractors, 
specifically operational data on last-mile delivery and 
empty mileage

• Combining and comparing Scope 3 data with varying 
levels of granularity and differing reporting method-
ologies used

• Uncertainty regarding the usage of emission factors 

for the fuels and energy carrier used.

Participants then jointly identified potential solutions to 
these challenges, forming the basis for this Guidance.

1.4 Structure of the Guidance
Figure 2: Structure of the Guidance

Chapter 1 
provides the 
objectives and 
approach of this 
Guidance. 

Chapters 2-5 
provide the guidance towards calculation, allocation, reporting and assuring of 
GHG emissions

Chapter 2 
sets out the data 
requirements 
and definitions, 
providing the 
required guidance 
to what variables 
to be collected 
and exchanged

Chapter 3 
describes the 
indicators to 
assess the 
logistics GHG 
performance 
and introduces 
a new data 
quality indicator

Chapter 4 
provides the 
practical steps 
to calculate 
GHG logistics 
emissions with 
or without 
primary data

Chapter 5 
introduces 
the necessary 
guidance 
towards 
assurance and 
verification of 
the calculations

Chapter 6 
considers the 
reporting of 
GHG emissions 
and gives 
overarching 
tips- and tricks 
include an 
example

Chapter 7 
Summarizes 
and provides a 
forward outlook 
on the intended
change and 
impact

1.5 Scope of the Guidance
It is important to note that the landscape of carbon 
accounting and reporting is evolving fast. The introduction 
of direct data-capture technology and digitization 
across many parts of the global transportation industry 
– while providing access to better data – increases the 
complexity of emissions calculation, comparison, and 
reporting. However, the challenge is not uniform, as the 
capture of and access to primary data is still problematic 
in some transportation sectors. 

This Guidance is written with these considerations in 
mind and aims to support the calculation journey to 
ensure the highest level of accuracy possible from the 
data sources available.

Given the increasing industry-wide focus on the need to 
decarbonize transportation and the significant investment 
in digitization of this sector, further improvements in the 
availability, quality, and timeliness of transportation- 
related data can be expected in the years ahead. It may, 
therefore, be necessary to issue further guidance 
updates to reflect this in the future, which readers are 
requested to take into account. 

1 Introduction2. Data requirements 

and definitions

12

2. Data requirements  

and definitions

The first step in any effort to calculate emissions is to identify and collect the relevant data for the required use 
case. This section therefore introduces the key definitions of logistics GHG emissions accounting and provides some 
reflections on data granularity and approaches to capture the required data. 

2.1 Definitions and concepts
There is a mutual understanding: to reach 2050 climate Throughout this Guidance, specific terms and concepts are 
used. These are defined in Table 1.

Table 1: Crucial definitions for concepts of logistics GHG emissions accounting

Term

Definition

Transport operator/
reporting company name

Shipment 

Consignment 

Transport operation category (TOC)

Transport-chain element (TCE)

Feedstock 

Ton (t)

Entity that carries out transport operations involving carriage of freight, passengers, or both.

Identifiable collection of one or more freight items (available to be) transported together 
from the original shipper to the ultimate consignee.

Separately identifiable amount of freight transported from one consignor to one consignee 
via one or more modes of transport.

Group of transport operations that share similar characteristics, based on mode, journey, 
freight, trade lane, or contract type. Aggregation to a TOC can be based on a specific round 
trip, vehicle class, or schedule. E.g., maritime container transport or shared long-haul road 
freight of pallets. 

Section of a transport chain within which the freight is carried by a single vehicle or transits 
through a single hub. E.g., the journey from port A to port B or the processing in a distribution 
center are TCEs.

Source of origin of the energy carrier(s) (such as grid electricity, renewable, soy, waste, or 
fossil; country or region specific). 

Unit of measurement for the mass of a consignment. Within the scope of this document, ton 
refers to a metric ton.

For example, for road, the TOC may include freight type, condition, journey type, and contract type, while for aviation 
it may include journey length and plane configuration. In addition, it groups different vehicles operating under the 
same network or lane together. 

Figure 3: Example of a transport chain, TCE, and TOC

End-to-End

Transport chain

Transport 
Operation 
Category (TOC)

Pre-Carriage 
to Port

Port to Port 
Main Leg 

Inland Trans-
shipment 

Rail Terminal 
(or port) to 
Regional DC

Regional(cid:31)
DC to 
Warehouse

Warehouse to 
Store / End 
Customer

TCE 1

TCE 2

TCE 3

TCE 4

TCE 5

TCE 6

TCE 7

TCE 8

TCE 9

TCE 10

TCE 11

TOC of a TCE can be a group 
of similar vehicles on:  • route

      • network

2. Data requirements and definitions 
 
13

2.2 Data considerations
Company emissions reduction road maps must strike a 
balance between two elements:

• Calculating emissions with what is technically and 
operationally feasible based on the available data 

• Being able to start implementing and monitoring 
reduction opportunities while communicating the 
limitations of the available data quality level.

For instance, a company that continues to quantify its 
emissions using financial data over the years will only 
be able to quantify an emission reduction if it lowers its 
expenses, while a methodology based on company- 
specific operational metrics would enable the tracking 
of reductions based on material, network, and/or 
supplier changes. 

Since the type of data used for the calculations shall 
always be reported alongside the resulting emissions, 
companies are encouraged to gather operational data 
systematically from their operations. The more granu-
lar the data is, the more precise and reliable their 
emissions calculations will be. Primary data is there-
fore always preferable, and companies should work on 
improving data availability to this end. 

At the same time, perfection should not stand in the 
way of progress. Other forms of data, such as modeled 
and default data, will have to be used along with less 

granular operational data where primary data is not 
available to conduct emissions calculations and imple-
ment decarbonization actions. Companies should seek 
a balance between using these input data sources to 
cater to their needs and taking consistent steps to 
continuously improve the data quality in their systems.

Similarly, calculations of emission intensity should be 
performed at a frequency that is deemed useful to track 
improvements over time, seasonality, or change in 
overall demand profiles. Examples are showcasing the 
peak season in December for the mail and parcel 
sector, a change in routing, or the introduction of 
battery-electric trucks.

Tracking and using individual trip-level data for reporting 
emissions can provide specific insights for certain use 
cases related to a trip if benchmarked correctly but 
also risks accentuating potential outliers. Thus, when 
using trip-level data, an aggregation over time is 
necessary to avoid conclusions drawn on the basis of 
one or a few individual trips.

Where primary data is not available, consideration of 
the scope and intended purpose of emissions calcula-
tions can help guide data requirements and establish 
what data as a minimum is needed to perform the task 
at hand. Table 2 provides details of the respective data 
recommendations for each use case.2

Table 2: Use cases and respective requirements

Use case

Reporting

Details

Examples

• Meeting regulatory or voluntary 

transparency requirements
• Focusing on selected period 

and whole organization or parts 
of the supply chain

• Corporate reporting (sustainability reports)
• Disclosures to rating platforms

Data recommendation

• Preferred: granular  

(primary) data

• Alternative: modeled or 

default data sets
• Using: aggregated  

emission intensity factors

Business  
decision-making 

• Analyzing past performance to 

make future changes 

• Reporting from carriers/LSPs 

to shippers 

• Mode switch 
• Collaboration with carriers 
• Horizontal collaboration 
• Selection of alternative fuels/vehicles 
• Identification of opportunities to reduce GHG 

• Preferred: granular  

(primary) data 

• Alternative: detailed  

modeled data 
• Using: granular,  

emissions hot spots

disaggregated emission 
intensity data

Granular optimization

• Analyzing past performance to 
track and measure progress 
• Reporting from carriers/LSPs 

• Carrier-level optimization (driver training, 

• Preferred: granular  

routing per leg, and consolidation) 

(primary) data 

• Quantification of the impact of idle times in 

• Alternative: detailed  

to shippers 

GHG emissions 

• Quantification of the impact of already  

implemented modal switch (to assess initial 
targets vs actual) 

• Supply chain optimization to reduce  

GHG emissions

modeled data 
• Using: granular,  

disaggregated emissions 
intensity data

2 These use cases mirror those identified in the GLEC Data Access and Exchange project, which focuses  

on the most common uses of data when shared across a value chain. Additional use cases are  
highlighted in the GLEC Framework but not covered here.

2. Data requirements and definitions14

2.3 Data variables
When collecting, using, and exchanging data, it is 
crucial that all parties use the same definitions for the 
data parameter in scope. The Guidance follows the 
definitions of the Smart Freight Centre Data Exchange 
Model (Data Access For Logistics Emissions Accounting 
and Reporting, or GLEC Data Access and Exchange 
project),3 which builds on the GLEC Framework.

Depending on which part of the logistics supply chain 
an organization operates in as well as its business 
model, different data variables will be required to be 
shared. It is therefore crucial to evaluate data needs 
with internal stakeholders before engaging in any 
GHG-related data collection and exchange activity.  
The Data Exchange Model categorizes which variables 
are mandatory to ensure compliance with the GLEC 
Framework and GLEC Declaration. However, companies 
should start from the minimum and aim to continuously 
work toward adopting more variables to achieve greater 
accuracy when calculating emissions from their supply 
chains.4

The Data Exchange Model also provides further  
information on data responsibilities per calculation or 
reporting case. Defining which of these are relevant can 
guide a company on what input data is sufficient and 
what data may be less crucial. The subsequent calculation 
approach will depend on the data available. 

Specific information for end-to-end calculations 
To understand end-to-end emissions in detail, total TCE 
emissions must be identified (see Chapter 4 for calculation 
approach). This requires TOC emission intensity to be 
identified first as a basis for further calculations. 

Input data for calculation of TOC emission intensity  
To define the input data, the principles of ISO 14083 
shall be followed. This sets out the requirements for 
each mode, with this Guidance specifying that a TOC 
emission intensity will always be calculated at the level 
of a fleet of vehicles operating in a specific network.

Input data for calculation of TCE emissions 
Companies shall refer to Table 3 for a list of variables to 
consider at the TOC and TCE level. Collecting information 
at a granular scale (per TCE), simplifies the upward 
aggregation process and provides a sufficient foundation 
to perform data-intensive tasks that inform supply 
chain decisions. This table is meant to act as a guide 
and qualitative representation of the more technical 
work conducted within the GLEC Data Access and 
Exchange project. When companies wish to implement 
the data protocol, they shall refer to the latest data 
model, proposed in the second publication of the  
GLEC Data Access and Exchange project, for more 
technical details. 

3 For more details on the GLEC Data Access and Exchange project, please see here. The quick download can be found here.
4 Actors may choose not to share data they may consider to be commercially sensitive or confidential.

2. Data requirements and definitions15

Note 1: The minimum requirements are defined for items marked with (*). 
Note 2: For companies where the TOC level of aggregation and exchange is more meaningful, they can fill out and collect the data at that level. 

Table 3: Variables to be considered for the data collection and exchange of GHG data on a TCE level

Term

Definition

TOC-level information

Transport operator/reporting 
company name/ID (*)

Identification code/name of the company submitting/reporting the data.

Transport information 
about a group of  
vehicles within a  
transport-chain  
element for a specific 
consignment

Accreditation status (*)

Statement of accreditation of the calculation methodology.

Verification status (*) 

Statement of external verification of the input data. 

Transport operation category 
(TOC) 

Group of transport operations that share similar characteristics, based on 
mode, journey, freight, trade lane, or contract type. Aggregation to a TOC can 
be based on a specific round trip, vehicle class, or schedule. 

Mode of transport (*)

Means of transport or type of transport (e.g., rail, sea, or road). 

Mode-specific asset type 

Specific category of asset, such as 40t truck, 3.5t van, container vessel,  
or bulk vessel. 

Emission class (road)

Identification of the vehicle emission class (road).

Load factor 

Empty distance

Ratio of the actual load (mass) to the maximum legally authorized load of a 
particular vehicle.

Ratio of the section of the route of a vehicle during which no freight is  
transported to the total distance of a vehicle on a TOC level.

Temperature control

Status of freight being non-ambient.

Energy consumption

Amount of energy consumed. Accompanied by a respective unit field. In case of 
multiple sources of energy, respective fields have to be defined.

Energy Carrier

Feedstock

Category of energy carrier, such as diesel, HVO, petrol, CNG, LNG, LPG, HFO, 
MGO, aviation fuel, hydrogen, methanol, and electricity. In case of multiple energy 
carriers, respective consumption (e.g., liters or emissions) need to be disclosed. 

Source of origin of the energy carrier(s) (e.g., electricity, renewable, soy, waste, 
or fossil; country or region specific).

Emission intensity (*)

Coefficient specifying transport activity’s GHG emissions at the TOC level.

WTW fuel emission factor 
(certified)

Coefficient of GHG emissions per unit of energy, provided for the specific  
feedstock/energy and certified independently.

Data quality indicator

Categorical variable defining the level of data quality reflected in the  
calculated CO2e.

TCE-level information

Shipment ID (*)

Identifier of the shipment.

Transport information 
about a single  
transport-chain  
element for a specific 
consignment.

Consignment ID (*)

Identifier of the consignment of a shipment.

Transport chain element ID (*)

Identifier of the transport-chain element of a consignment.

Freight mass5(*)

Packaging unit

Mass of the transported freight. The suggested unit is kg.

Category of the packaging designed to contain one or more articles or  
packages or bulk material for the purposes of transport, handling and/or  
distribution. In this case, maritime and rail containers (e.g., twenty-foot  
equivalent or TEU, forty-foot equivalent or FEU) are considered as packaging 
unit, as well as acting as a functional unit for transportation used for reporting 
and analytical purposes. The number of units needs to be disclosed alongside 
unit category.

Origin location (*)

Location of pick-up of the consignment.

Table continued on the next page.

5 Freight mass: for the shipping industry, this should include container weight. 

2. Data requirements and definitions16

Table continued from the previous page.

Table 3: Variables to be considered for the data collection and exchange of GHG data on a TCE level

Term

Definition

TCE-level information

Destination location (*)

Location of delivery of the consignment.

Transport information 
about a single  
transport-chain 
element for a specific 
consignment.

Actual distance

Activity distance

Distance between the origin and the destination of a consignment of freight or  
a vehicle, measured by a telematics system.

Distance between loading and unloading of the freight transported – distance provided 
should be the planned distance. Shortest feasible distance in ISO 14083 should be 
used for road, rail, inland waterways, and sea transport. Great-circle distance should 
be used for air.

Departure date

Date of departure of the consignment.

Arrival date

Date of arrival of the consignment.

Transport activity (*)

Amount of freight multiplied by the assignment or allocation distance, expressed in 
ton-kilometers (tkm). For maritime movements, TEU-kilometers (TEUkm) are also 
permitted, and for the mail and parcel sector, item-kilometers (itemkm) can be used.

Voyage number

Identification number of the specific voyage

Flight number

Identification number of the IATA flight number.

CO2e TTW (*)

CO2e WTW (*)

GHG emissions released to atmosphere as a result of vehicle operation  
(tank-to-wheel).

GHG emissions released to atmosphere during the process of producing, storing, 
processing, and distributing an energy carrier for vehicle operation + GHG released to 
atmosphere as a result of vehicle operation (well to wheel).

2.4 Data exchange
Data requirements are further guided by the intended 
reporting level. The more granular the aggregation 
level, the more granular the data requirement. The 
exchange of emissions from a carrier to a shipper (or 
LSP) can take place at the level of: 

• Company: GHG emissions produced by the carrier for 

the client 

• Transport chain: GHG emissions of a consignment 

(from origin to destination)

• TCE: GHG emissions of a transport leg (at consign-

ment level)

A carrier or shipper, for its own business reporting and 
analytical purpose, aggregate emissions to various 
levels, including:

• Allocation of emissions and calculation of emission 
intensity per location (origin, destination, trade lane)

• Allocation of emissions and calculation of emission 

intensity per TOC (group of assets)

• Split of emissions per energy source used in a TOC

• Allocation of emissions per carrier, LSP, or shipper to 

monitor and report performance

• Allocation and understanding of emissions per driver

In case of network operations, please note that for a 
shipper, a single TCE (point A-B) in the transport chain 
can actually consist of multiple TCEs (A-X, X-Y, Y-B) 
within the carrier network. 

2. Data requirements and definitions17

2.5 Adopting a new data structure
The structure variables summarized in Table 3 shall be 
followed for the collection and storage of data as 
closely as possible, for example, regarding naming 
conventions and respective units. The structure is 
designed to create consistency, facilitate data exchange 
between different stakeholders, and consider future 
reporting needs of the logistics industry. This will also 
decrease the time needed to handle and blend data and 
improve transparency in the use of semantics in 
emissions reporting.

In case this list of variables is too extensive considering 
each company’s business scope and reporting needs, 
minimum variables (as shown in Table 3) should be 
tracked. We recommend to then start with monitoring 
and exchanging the mandatory variables and, as the IT 
systems mature, add more variables that stem from 
business needs. Companies can consider the following 
guiding questions when designing their data ware-
houses and collection systems. These questions are 
meant to provide an example of main questions to  
be answered and to enable the reverse engineering  
of needed variables for each company’s use case.  
The questions originate from discussions that took 
place in the current and the GLEC Data Access and 
Exchange project.

Questions to consider

• What is the scope and purpose of data collection and 

reporting?

• Who is the audience of the reported emissions?

• With which preferred frequency shall data be  

aggregated? Annually, quarterly, monthly? Other?

• Who is the data owner and where is the data stored? 

• Who is the party calculating the GHG emissions?

• What local/national regulations exist concerning data 

collection?

• Is there any information on the multimodal chains 

(e.g., knowledge on the ship or train cargo is  
transported in)?

• Is there any empirical data on empty distance and 

load factors?

• In case of lack of data, what are the minimum  

characteristics known for a TOC to navigate through 
default values selection?

• How are shipments versus consignments captured in 

the system?

• What are the unique IDs with which carriers can be 

identified with?

• What are the unique IDs with which consignments of 

a shipment can be identified with?

2. Data requirements and definitions3. Performance 

indicators and  
data quality

19

3. Performance indicators  

and data quality

3.1 Logistics GHG emissions  
performance indicators
When evaluating the GHG emissions performance of 
logistics chains and activity, the following indicators 
shall be used:

• Emissions, expressed in WTW CO2e (kg)

• Emission intensity, expressed as the emissions per 

activity (kgCO2e/tkm)6
• Transport activity (tkm)

In specific circumstances, alternative allocations can be 
considered. This needs to be justified and documented. 
In the mail and parcel operations, the transport  
activity can also be expressed per item-kilometer.  
For containerized transport, the transport activity can 
be expressed in TEU-kilometers. This needs to be 
applied throughout the transport chain. 

To allow for a complete supply chain and comparison 
across operations, conversion factors are provided:

• For conversion factors from TEUs to tons, a weight of 

10 tons is considered average TEU, 14.5 tons is 
considered heavy cargo, and 6 tons is considered 
lightweight cargo. Please note that a TEU is a standard 
20-foot container, meaning that a 40-foot container is 
2 TEU and at 20 tons is considered standard weight.  
A 45-foot container is 2.25 TEU. Further details are 
specified in the GLEC Framework and the Clean 
Cargo Methodology. 

• For conversion factors from items to tons, no standard 
conversion factors exist. Modeling and averaging of 
the weight associated with standard packaging 
categories is therefore recommended. This is meant 
to be performed at a company level. 

With these metrics, the overall GHG performance  
of logistics operations can be assessed. However, a 
perfect calculation does not exist, and the performance 
of operations can be influenced by many factors that 
need to be considered when evaluating and comparing 
transport chains or even similar elements of different 
transport chains (i.e., comparing a middle-mile TCE). 
For example, route network, weather, and geography 
can all have a significant effect on the final emissions.

Further details of the calculation are provided in 
Chapter 4. 

3.2 Evaluating input data quality 
for GHG calculation
Data quality is a composite indicator, approximating the 
extent to which information represents reality. The 
audience of any emissions report should be aware of 
the data type and quality involved in the calculation of 
GHG impacts. This is crucial as the communicated 
numbers are then placed in a concept of “confidence” 
as to how well they reflect reality. 

Information on data quality is as crucial as the emissions 
information, as it fosters trust in the shared information 
and enables transparency on any assumptions made in 
the calculation process.

If, for example, data collection is extremely challenging 
for a specific TOC, then the calculation will probably be 
based on default data. When communicating the 
emissions of this TOC to the audience, the specifics of 
the calculation will be qualitatively characterized by the 
data quality indicator. Thus, the audience can correctly 
interpret the communicated output. 

On top of this, different data inputs are required for 
different use cases. For instance, for annual reporting, 
a different level of granularity and detail is required for 
supply chain optimization. In perfect circumstances, the 
data quality needs to conform to the use case at hand to 
facilitate informed decisions. If an organization cannot 
meet the data-quality requirements of a specific use 
case, it is advised to take that into account when 
communicating the certainty or uncertainty of  
the output. 

To create transparency on data quality, a tiered quality 
ranking indicator should be applied to the TOC and TCE 
variables (Table 4 and Table 5). This is a separate, more 
detailed indicator than the ISO 14083 “primary/modeled/
default” qualification and follows the logic of the 
Pathfinder Framework for data quality, with adjustments 
to reflect the specificities of the logistics industry. 

The resulting key performance indicator (KPI) will 
create more clarity on the various data sources and  
the level of confidence an audience can have in the 
communicated amount of total CO2e within an  
end-to-end supply chain.

6 Distribution centers, warehouses, and transport nodes shall use tonnage, items or TEUs as the denominator for throughput. 

3. Performance indicators and data quality20

Table 4: Data quality indicator at a TOC level 

Data quality level

4 - Unsatisfactory

3 - Sufficient

2 - Good

1 - Excellent

Requirements of  
emission intensity

• Proxy used (e.g., financial 

• Default emission 

• Modeled emission 

• Carrier-specific  

data or global default 
values)

intensity factors for 
mode/freight type 
(e.g., GLEC or regional 
default data)

Input data to obtain 
or calculate emission 
intensity 

• Modeling from invoice 

• Default GLEC factors 

data 

for mode/freight 

• Modeling without 

geographic adaptations in 
default factors

• Default regional  
factors for mode/
freight

emission intensity factor 
for TOC, which is updated 
monthly or quarterly or 
as frequent as deemed 
necessary

• Primary data calculation 
for defined TOC using:
- Energy type and fuel 

emission factor

- Total energy  

consumption within 
chosen timeframe

- Total transport activity 
within chosen time-
frame

intensity factor, using 
known TOC category 
with specific asset 
class, considering (i) 
empty distance and (ii) 
load factors

or
• Carrier-specific annual 

average emission  
intensity factor for TOC

or
• Green freight program

• Modeled energy-based 
factors for defined TOC 
(in conformance with 
GLEC Framework)

or
• Primary data  

calculation for defined 
TOC using: 
- Energy type and fuel 

emission factor

- Total energy  

consumption within 
chosen timeframe
- Total transport activ-
ity within chosen  
timeframe 

Conforming use cases 

• Corporate reporting 

• Selection of alternative 

• Carrier-level  

• Customer reporting 

• Corporate target  

setting and  
communication 

• Mode selection

fuels/vehicles 

• Horizontal  

collaboration 

• LSP performance 

evaluation

optimization (driver 
training, routing per 
leg, or consolidation), 
conducted by transport 
operator 

• Supply chain  
optimization 

• Carrier performance 

evaluation

Table 5: Data quality indicator at a TCE level

Data quality level

4 - Unsatisfactory

3 - Sufficient

2 - Good

1 - Excellent

Origin–destination

• Country level

• City level

• Postal code or planned 

• Postal code/ coordinates/

Weight

Emission intensity  
factor of TOC 

• Estimated

• Proxy

• Estimated

• Default value

distance

• Actual

planned distance

• Actual

• Modeled or carrier- 

specific annual  
emission intensity 
factor

• Carrier-specific emission 
intensity factor updated 
monthly or quarterly or 
as frequent as deemed 
necessary

3. Performance indicators and data quality21

To interpret and decide where a data set stands on this 
quality assessment, the above measures shall be seen 
as a checklist where all conditions must be satisfied 
(“and” relationship) to meet the required tier. For 
example, a data set cannot rank “good” if all other 
conditions are met but the fuel type is unknown and 
thus a default is assumed. 

The ranking “unsatisfactory” has been included to 
reflect current realities and approaches undertaken  
by the industry, but the ranking is neither ISO 14083 
compliant nor recommended. 

Increasing the data quality level will require organizations 
to invest significant time and multistakeholder effort to 
gradually move toward a “good” or “excellent” data 
quality ranking. It is understood that progress toward 
better data quality will likely be made over time and 
require financial commitment, human resource allocation, 
and IT system upgrades. However, perfect data is not 
necessary for all decisions. Instead, the required data 
quality needs to be matched with the corresponding  
use case and reporting requirements (see below for 
further details).

If an organization cannot meet the data quality require-
ments of a specific use case, it is advised to take that 
into account when communicating the certainty or 
uncertainty of the outputs. It is crucial to communicate 
the data quality KPI along with the emissions results to 
enable clarity for the audience regarding the data input 
of each use case. It is highly advised to perform the 
respective actions with the recommended data quality 
ranking for the input data.

3.2.1  Defining TOC and sample size to  
calculate emission intensity

There are three main characteristics to define a TOC: 
mode of transport accompanied by an asset type or 
class, the operational characteristics (temperature 
control, contract type, etc.) and the journey type  
(geography, routing, and distance). For rail transport, 
the propulsion type is also required. In other modes  
of transport, the energy source could be used to 
characterize a TOC but it is not a necessary require-
ment. By defining a TOC with a mixed energy source 
and as the fleet gradually decarbonizes, this will be 
reflected by a decreasing emission intensity over time 
as long as the carbon intensity of the energy source 
decreases. On the other hand, a TOC defined with a 
single energy source can help in understanding and 
comparing other factors, such as driver efficiency  
and utilization rates.

When assessing the quality ranking of an emission 
intensity, ideally 100% of the data stemming from the 
TOC under study shall be used. The data quality will 
then represent the full population and all its features. 
When asset data is missing within the same TOC,  
it is suggested to at least try to quantify what share  
of total assets have missing information. The aim is  
to understand exactly how much knowledge exists at 
the TOC level and to be confident when communicating 
the TOC description and its emission intensity to other 
stakeholders. 

To decide on a sample to calculate the emission  
intensity when data from the full population of the  
TOC is not known, the recommendation is to employ  
the following five steps:

      Consider the energy source(s) of the TOC. If there 
1
are multiple energy sources, the TOC can either be 
split into different, single-energy-source TOCs or be 
treated as one TOC with multiple energy sources. 

2

3

Count the assets and their total contribution to the 
total emissions of the TOC. When the assets have 
been split into multiple TOCs, ensure that the 
population of each TOC is bigger than 30 or over 
80% of the data is covered through the sample. 
Having less than 30 assets in a TOC will mean  
that this population is very small to sample from  
and derive statistically significant assertions.  
In that case, monitoring primary data from all  
assets is recommended. If that is not possible,  
using at least 80% to derive the emission intensity  
is deemed necessary. 

In cases where more than 30 assets exist,  
the transport operator can choose to take  
a statistically relevant sample size from the  
total number of assets (total TOC fleet size).  
The sample should reflect the total TOC fleet  
size and be representative of the assets within  
the TOC. Ensure the sample is reflecting all  
required operation features (e.g., transport  
activity, loading rates, and energy consumption).  
Only then will the operator be able to confidently 
generalize the results of the sample to the  
population.  

4

Compute the emission intensity of the sample, 
based on primary data and assume the same  
value for the full population of the TOC.

3. Performance indicators and data quality 
 
 
 
 
22

5

Compute the total emissions, and data quality  
of the TOC using the guidance of Section 3.2.2.  
and Section 4.1.  

was derived is clear and the audience using these 
values will be confident in making decisions for their 
supply chain.  

Example: if both Euro 5 and 6 vehicles are in a 
composed TOC and the population’s transport 
activity is 60%-40%, then that ratio shall also  
be reflected in the sample. The same applies  
to other characteristics defining the TOC (e.g.,  
the energy source or size). 

The key takeaway is that the method chosen to reach  
an emission intensity value and respective data quality 
indicator shall be methodologically sound and respect 
the features of a TOC. In addition, by being transparent 
and communicating those choices to the relevant 
stakeholders, the context of how the emission intensity 

3.2.2  Data quality assessment of an  
end-to-end transport chain 

The data quality of an end-to-end transport chain shall 
be calculated using a weighted average of the individual 
data quality indices of each TCE based on the respective 
emissions of each TCE within the total transport chain. 
With this approach, the transport-chain element’s data 
quality with the highest emissions will be of most 
significance to the aggregated data quality value of  
the full transport chain. See the formula below, which 
will result in a data quality index of 1-4:

Data quality of transport chain (end-to-end)

= data quality of TCEn*

n                             emissions of TCEn
1       emissions of the transport chain

∑

3. Performance indicators and data quality 
 
4. Calculation 

guidance: Using 
primary data

24

4. Calculation guidance:  
Using primary data

4.1 Introduction: Calculation with 
primary data
Many shipments have multiple transport legs in their 
transport chain, and each TCE may include a different 
mode or carrier performing the transport. As a result, 
the calculation of logistics freight emissions for Scope 3 
reporting can be very complex. 

The reader is encouraged to read the GLEC Framework 
and ISO 14083 to understand further details. 

This section sets out the five calculation steps required 
to determine GHG emissions across the supply chain 
using primary data that corresponds to a “good” or 

“excellent” quality level (Figure 4). To maximize  
calculation consistency, required data variables and 
calculation method to be used are specified. 

Since it is not always easy to collect useful primary data 
from transport service providers, Chapter 5 covers how 
to deal with such a lack of information per mode. To 
increase understanding of the Guidance, this includes  
a recommendation on who should undertake the 
calculation for each step. In addition, it is suggested 
and recommended to utilize a Smart Freight Centre 
accredited partner to ensure calculations are compliant 
with the GLEC Framework. 

Figure 4: Flowchart representing the calculating and reporting steps 

Repeat end-to-end

1

Set boundaries 
and goals

2

Define TOC 
emission 
intensity value

3

Calculate 
emissions 
at TCE

4

Verify and 
validate your 
calculation

5

Report 
and use

A
B

Map and 
collect data

Calculate TCE 
emissions

A
B
C
D

Map and 
collect data

Determine Fuel
Emission Factor

Calculate total 
emissions of TOC

Calculate emission 
intensity of TOC

Requires input from 
Transport Operator

4.1.1  Set boundaries and goals (Step 1)

• Condition (ambient, refrigerated, etc.)

The first step is to identify the scope of logistics activities 
that will be included in the calculation process. For this 
purpose, it is essential to determine the main objective, 
namely what the results will be used for and with whom 
the emission intensity values will be shared and what 
their reporting activity level is (i.e., internal, B2B, or 
external reporting). Based on this information and given 
a single end-to-end supply chain, qualitative selection 
criteria for TOCs can be established and TOCs can be 
composed. 

Details on the main features of the transport equipment 
and journey can be used to help define the TOC. Some 
of the characteristics to be considered are:

• Freight type (dry bulk, containerized, parcel, volume 

limited, etc.)

• Journey type (long haul, multimodal, short sea 

shipping, last mile, etc.)

• Contract type (full-truck load, less-than-truck load)

Further information regarding definition of the TOC per 
transport mode can be found in the mode-specific 
sections (Section 4.2).

The transport chain shall be the complete transport 
activity to move the freight from origin to destination, 
broken into sequential TCE and including logistics site 
operations. Figure 5 shows an example of how to break 
down a transport chain in the individual elements based 
on the TOC they belong in.

4. Calculation guidance: Using primary data25

Figure 5: Example transport chain 

End-to-End

Transport chain

Keyresults:
• Activity (tkm)
• Emissions (kgCO2e)
• Emission Intensity 
   (kgCO2e/tkm)
• Data Quality ranking

Pre- Carriage 
to Port

Port to Port 
Main Leg 

Inland Trans-
shipment 

Rail Terminal 
(or port) to 
Regional DC

Regional(cid:31)
DC to 
Warehouse

Warehouse to 
Store / End 
Customer

TCE 1

TCE 2

TCE 3

TCE 4

TCE 5

TCE 6

TCE 7

TCE 8

TCE 9

TCE 10

TCE 11

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

4.1.2  Calculate the emission intensity  
for the TOC and hub operation category (HOC) 
(Step2)

Summary

The transport operator calculates the CO2e emission 
intensity for the transport activity of a TOC or HOC.  
A TOC or HOC consists of groups of similar round  
trips or logistics sites that are considered over a 
predetermined period of a quarter, month or other 
frequency, to provide a representation of how freight 
transportation services are purchased and delivered.  
A TOC or HOC emission intensity value should reflect 
all emissions incurred. This means a TOC includes 
empty trips within the chosen period of observation. 

If there is no or limited access to primary data, the 
calculation method by modality should be followed. 

In detail

2A: Collect the data that is needed to calculate the 
emission intensity

TOCs are decided on and based on the available data. 
The quality of the data can be classified into four 
categories: unsatisfactory, sufficient, good, or excellent. 
Refer to Section 3.2.2 for the minimum calculation 
requirements. 

7 See Chapter 3 for list of approved sources of emission factors.

Transport operators must update the values for  
the defined TOCs/HOCs regularly. This data should, 
depending on the use case, be collected monthly or 
quarterly or as frequent as deemed required.

2B: Determine the Fuel Emission Factor (FEF)

Since the modalities and the corresponding fuel types 
used in the TOC/HOC are known, the FEF (kgCO2e per 
L/kg/kWh) of consumed fuel – which indicates how 
many kg of CO2e is emitted per unit of fuel – should be 
obtained from energy producers. Extra attention is 
needed when matching the fuel consumed with a fuel 
emission factor; the same units need to be respected. 
For example, if the fuel is measured in liters, then the 
FEF has to be expressed in liters too as in kgCO2e per 
L. Alternatively, matched values should be obtained 
from approved sources.7 It is important to consider  
the FEF for the whole life cycle of the consumed fuel, 
that is, for WTW emissions. This includes extraction, 
production, transmission, and usage. FEFs shall be 
expressed in CO2e. 

Emission factors can be obtained from the following 
sources (in order of priority): 

1   FEF provided by the energy/fuel provider, with 
associated third-party assurance certificate

2   National or regional emission factors from reputable 
sources (e.g., UK BEIS, US EIA data, French ADEME, 
or IEA) 

3    FEFs provided by the GLEC Framework  

(Module 1).

4. Calculation guidance: Using primary data26

2C: Calculate the total CO2e emissions for the TOC or HOC

The CO2e emissions for the TOC and HOC are calculated by multiplying the fuel/energy consumed with the FEF 
(WTW). It is assumed in this section that the fuel consumption is measured in liters, but other measures are 
common practice (e.g., kwh or kg). The empty distance and loading factor attributes for transport are automatically 
included in the calculations as their basis is primary data.

C1   Emissions [kgCO2e] = fuel consumed [L] × fuel emission factor

[

kgCO2e
L

]

If various fuel types are used in the TOC, the following method should be applied to determine the total emissions:

C2   Transport emissions [kgCO2e]

= (fuel 1 consumed [L] * emission factor fuel 1 [kgCO2e/L]) + (fuel 2 consumed [L]
* emission factor fuel 2 [kgCO2e/L]) + ... + (fuel N consumed [L]
* emission factor fuel N [kgCO2e/L])

2D: Allocate the emissions to the transport activity and calculate the emission intensity of TOC 

The emission intensity is used to indicate how polluting the transported shipments in the considered TOC are. In 
order to calculate the emission intensity, the total transport activity shall be calculated first. The transport activity 
is the sum of the mass and activity distance of each shipment within the TOC considered (alternative with the same 
result: total mass shipped multiplied by average transport activity distance or average mass multiplied by total 
activity distance traveled).8 For hub activity only the transported mass is taken into account. The weight is considered 
the cargo including packaging as received from the consignor. Additional packaging materials used by the transport 
operator to support transportation should not be considered. The transport activity shall be calculated as follows 
(where n is the number of TCE considered within the TOC or HOC): 

D1   Transport activity[tkm] =

n

1∑

transported mass [t]n x transport distance [km]n

D2   Hub activity[t] =

n

1∑

transported massn

In the mail and parcel sector, the transport weight can also be expressed by number of items; in that case, the 
formula would multiply the average number of items by the total transport distance to obtain the transport activity. 
In the maritime sector, the transport weight can be calculated by the number of TEUs, meaning that the number of 
TEUs can be multiplied by the transport distance to obtain the transport activity. 

Next, the emission intensity can be calculated by dividing the total emissions by the transport activity.

D3   Emission intensity of TOC [kgCO2 e/tkm] = 

n         total Transport Emissions [kgCO2e]
1                  total transport activity [tkm]

∑

8 If the planned distance is not available and only the actual total distance is known, ensure the distance is corrected 

with a distance adjustment factor to avoid underreporting and ensure compliance with ISO 14083.  
See the modal sections and ISO 14083 for details on distance.

4. Calculation guidance: Using primary data27

D4   Emission intensity of HOC [kgCO2e/t] =

n                   total hub emissions [kgCO2e]
1                                  total hub activity [t]

∑

The emission intensity resulting from equation 3 is an aggregate value for all shipments included in the TOC. This 
value can now be shared with shippers whose shipments are represented by the TOC along with the data quality index. 

Repeat step 1 and step C1-D4 to calculate the emission intensities for all TOCs in the transport network. 

4.1.3  Calculate emissions for the TCE, the transport chain, and allocate emissions  
at a product unit level (Step 3)

Summary

Shippers9 should collect emission intensity values for the TOCs and logistics sites representing the TCEs of their 
shipments from their transport operators. Using the collected emission intensity values, shippers can calculate the 
emissions for each of the TCEs of their own shipments and aggregate to the required transport chain and subse-
quently allocate the emissions at a desired reporting level (e.g., packaging unit or product unit).

In detail

Step 3A: Calculate the emissions for the TCE

A2   Emissions per TCE [kgCO2e] for transport operations

For transport operations, the TOC emission intensity shall be collected from the transport operator for the TCE of 
kgCO2e
the shipment and multiplied with the weight of the consignment and the TCE distance.
tkm

× mass of consignment[t]  ×TCE distance [km]

= TOC emission intensity

]

[

A1   Emissions per TCE [kgCO2e] for hub operations
kgCO2e
t

= TOC emission intensity

[

]

× mass of consignment[t] 

For hub operations, the HOC emission intensity shall be collected from the transport operator for the TCE of the 
shipment and multiplied with the weight of the consignment. 

A2   Emissions per TCE [kgCO2e] for transport operations

= TOC emission intensity

[

kgCO2e
tkm

Repeat this for each TCE within a transport chain.

A1   Emissions per TCE [kgCO2e] for hub operations
kgCO2e
t

= TOC emission intensity

[

]

]

× mass of consignment[t]  ×TCE distance [km]

× mass of consignment[t] 

Step 3B: Aggregate the emissions to the transport chain: end-to-end

For a full end-to-end transport chain, the data needed to calculate logistics emissions on a single TCE shall be 
collected, which consists of the TOC, the TOC emission intensity, the transport activity (planned distance and mass), 
and the data quality as mentioned in Table 5. 

For each of the TCEs, calculation steps 3a shall be performed. After calculating the emissions for all TCEs, all TCE 
emissions shall be added up to obtain the value of total emissions for the transport chain (Figure 5).

9 Shippers are referred to here; however, this also includes LSPs and other freight buyers who act as shippers.

4. Calculation guidance: Using primary data 
 
28

The total emissions of a transport chain – end-to-end supply chain – are calculated by aggregating the individual 
emissions of each TCE. The emission intensity of the transport chain is obtained by dividing the total transport-chain 
emissions to the total transport activity.10 The data quality is calculated using a weighted average, weighing for the 
respective emissions of each TCE. 

B1   Emissions of transport chain (end-to-end) [kgCO2e] = emissions of TCEn

∑

n

1

n

B2   Transport activity of transport chain (end-to-end) [tkm] =

∑

transport activity of TCEn

1

B3   Emission intensity of transport chain (end-to-end) [kgCO2e/tkm]

n
1

∑ 

  emissions of TCEn 
  transport activity of TCEn

n
1

=

∑ 

B4   Data quality of transport chain (end-to-end)

= data quality of TCEn*

n 

1∑

emissions of TCEn 
emissions of the transport chain

Step 3C (optional): Allocate the total emissions at desired product unit level

In addition, for companies that operate in parcel or product-oriented industries, the packaging unit and amount of 
product transported will be needed to answer the question of emissions per product or parcel.

Emissions of a transport chain shall be divided by the number of product units to derive the emissions on a product level:

C1   Emissions per product unit [kgCO2e] =

emissions per transport chain [kgCO2e]
number of product units

prEN 17837:2023 provides further guidance on how to allocate emissions to a specific parcel based on that parcel’s 
weight and volume, allowing for more accurate and granular allocation.

4.1.4  Verify and validate (Step 4)

The next step is to verify and validate the inputs and outputs of the logistics emissions calculation and reporting so 
that a company, its customers, and external stakeholders can have confidence in the accuracy of the reporting. 
Please see Chapter 5 (Assurance) for details. 

 4.1.5  Use the results for desired reporting purposes (Step 5)

Once the emissions have been calculated, the reader is encouraged to refer to Chapter 4 of the GLEC Framework. 
The company responsible for reporting has the option to communicate their emissions in a GLEC-conformant way. 
If the company chooses to stay GLEC conformant, then the GLEC Declaration (GLEC Framework, Chapter 4) shall 
be used as guidance when declaring the emissions with the addition of the data quality indicator. The aesthetic 
interpretation (design choices, sequence of presenting emissions data) of the GLEC Declaration in a report or a 

10 Hub emissions are included in the total emissions of a transport chain. The hub 
activities are not included in the total transport activity of a transport chain.

4. Calculation guidance: Using primary data29

dashboard is up to the judgement of the stakeholder creating the report. However, there is the prerequisite of 
transparently showing the minimum variables and metrics as stated by the GLEC Declaration. 

Specifically, in the GLEC Declaration section, various cases of communicating the results can be found (e.g., B2B 
and to external stakeholders). The party who communicates the results is also responsible for clarifying the origin 
of this information and the extent of accuracy the amounts of CO2e have with the real system they represent. Thus, 
we advise that the following data quality index (Section 3.1.2) is added to the GLEC Declaration as a mandatory 
element. In addition, it is welcomed to build on these and include more details as deemed appropriate by each 
company when communicating its results to interested parties. In case of deviations from the mandatory variables, 
a company cannot claim GLEC conformity.

4.2 Calculation without primary data (per mode) 
In Section 4.1, we explained the calculation steps of logistics emissions using actual primary data. However, in practice it 
can be difficult to obtain primary data; therefore, alternative calculation methods based on modeled or default data can 
be used. The calculation steps when using modeled or default values are somewhat different than when using primary 
data and, in addition, modality-specific approaches are required. We will therefore highlight the calculation methods and 
particularities that arise at mode level if the data variables required in Step 2A are not fully available.

In case the primary data variables are known, the emissions can be calculated directly. However, if primary data 
variables are missing, modeled or default WTW emission intensity values should be used: 

• Companies should work with carriers to get the actual fuel efficiency or CO2e emission intensity per TOC that 

represent the load factor and empty distance for that network.

• If this is not feasible, then companies can model these data variables using accredited calculation tools.

• Use default factors only if there is no access to more accurate data. Default factors in the GLEC Framework cover 

standard values for empty distance and load factors.

4.2.1  Road 

Road transportation is used in nearly every transport chain. Due the highly fragmented nature of the road transport 
sector, it might be difficult to obtain primary transport data from carriers and/or LSPs. In such cases, the logistics 
emissions can be calculated using modeled or default values. This is reflected in the following diagram: 

Figure 6: Road freight flowchart for calculation

Decision points

Process elements

Start

TOC emission 
intensity known?

Yes

Verify if empty 
mileage and 
loading factors 
are included & 
adjust if needed

Use it to 
calculate 
emissions

Use planned 
distance and 
increase by 
5% distance 
adjustment factor

No

Fuel 
consumption 
of the vehicle 
known?

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Go to section 4.1 
Primary Data 
calculation

Shipment weight 
known?

Planned TCE 
distance known?

Report emission 
intensity & 
TCE emissions 
in tkm

Select 
applicable 
emission 
intensity from 
defaults 

No

No

Select an 
appropriate 
proxy

Use actual 
distance

Prerequisite is to have a specific time period defined 
*conversion from TEU to tonnes is possible 
** ensure the applicable distance adjustment factor are applied if actual  
     transport distances are used

4. Calculation guidance: Using primary data 
 
30

Specific country programs, such as SmartWay EPA, provide annual emission intensity performance of road freight 
operators. 

In the GLEC Framework, Module 2, the road emission intensity values [gCO2e/tkm] for WTW are provided for Europe 
and South America based on the following standardized characteristics: 

• Vehicle type and size

• Empty distance factor

• Consumption factors

• Load factor 

• Fuel type

If limited or no information is known about the actual transportation, the intent is to use the tables to select the 
default road emission intensity factors for WTW that come closest to the vehicle used to transport the shipment. In 
this case, the emissions calculation’s data quality is classed as “sufficient.”

For road freight, the planned distance increased by 5% to correct for incidental deviations shall be used, or the 
actual distance can be used if the planned distance is not known. In case of known deviations, 30% shall be added 
to the planned distance. In case of calculating empty distance, then the formula to be used is:

Empty distance (%) =

Empty distance (km)

 Empty distance (km)+Loaded distance(km)

Empty distance (km) =

GLEC default % for empty distance * loaded distance (km)

1-GLEC default % for empty distance

TOCs should be composed based on similar characteristics of certain transport activities. In Table 6, we list some 
characteristics that can be used when selecting shipments for a TOC for road transport.

Table 6: Recommended road freight TOC characteristics

Freight type

Condition

Journey type

Contract type

• Ambient
• Temperature controlled

• Point to point (long haul)
• Collection and delivery

• Shared transport
• Dedicated contract (charter)

• Dry bulk
• Liquid bulk
• Containerized
• Palletized
• Mass limited, general 
freight (heavy cargo)

• Volume limited, general 
freight (light cargo, mail, 
and parcel)

Mail and parcel sector 
In the mail and parcel sector, where knowledge of the weight of individual consignments may be limited, the weight 
can be estimated to enable consistency of the calculation through an end-to-end transport chain. This can be done 
on the basis of standard product categories used. 

Alternatively, the emissions can also be allocated per item and consider volume in conjunction with weight in the 
allocation mechanism. In this case, the total emissions incurred on a journey are allocated based on their volume, 
potentially weight, and the number of items transported. The performance indicator would also need to reflect the 
GHG emissions or item-kilometers and needs to be applied throughout the transport chain. 

The distance for road freight shall be the planned distance between the loading and unloading point – this also 
applies to the mail and parcel sector.

EN17837: Parcel Delivery Environmental Footprint (forthcoming) will provide further details on the allocation 
mechanisms for the mail and parcel sector.

4. Calculation guidance: Using primary data31

4.2.2  Sea 

The following adjustments take place for sea and maritime transport:

• For container vessels, the Clean Cargo methodology provides a set of industry average emission intensity factors 

for maritime container transport per trade lane that are updated annually. Through Smart Freight Centre  
membership, carrier-specific trade lane factors are accessible.11 When calculating activity for a shipment/
consignment, if specific mass or weight value is lacking, the equation can be adapted to reflect the common  
unit in shipping, TEU. Conversion factors from TEU and FEU to tons are available. 

• For other vessel types, default factors for the variable of emission intensity are provided in Module 2 of the GLEC 

Framework.

Figure 7: Sea freight flowchart for calculation

Decision points

Process elements

Start

Emission 
Intensity 
available by 
carrier?

Yes

Use it to 
calculate the 
emissions

Use it to 
calculate 
emissions*

Use actual 
distance

Shipment 
weight 
known?

Yes

No

No

Yes

Is the vessel
 a container 
ship?

No

Use Clean 
Cargo
(average / 
Carrier) 
emission 
intensity per 
port pair**

Check GLEC 
Module 2 or 
IMO for default 
intensity 
values for 
ships / fuels

Yes

Distance data 
known?

No

Report 
emission 
intensity & 
total emissions 
in tkm / 
TEUkm

Use standard 
approach to 
average net 
weights*

Use planned 
distance & 
add 15% 
Distance 
Adjustment 
Factor

Prerequisite is to have a specific time period defined 
*conversion from TEU to tonnes is possible 
** ensure the applicable distance adjustment factor are applied if actual transport distances are used

Table 7: Recommended sea freight TOC characteristics

Vessel type

Freight condition

Service type

• Bulk
• Chemical tanker
• Container ship
• Roll-on-Roll-off
• Liquified gas tanker
• Oil tanker
• Other liquid tanker
• Breakbulk

• Ambient
• Temperature controlled
• Mixed-ambient and temperature-con-

trolled freight

• Scheduled (trade lane)
• Chartered

11 At the time of writing, there is ongoing development establishing carrier-specific 
container transport emission intensity factors per port-pair combination. Please 
see www.smartfreightcentre.org or the latest information.

4. Calculation guidance: Using primary data 
32

4.2.3  Inland waterways

The scope of the emissions when calculating for this 
mode should include empty backhauls and vessel 
repositioning. The GLEC Framework methodology is 
aligned with the principles of the International Maritime 
Organization (IMO) guidelines and the US EPA SmartWay 
Barge Carrier Tool. To ensure comparability, where the 
methodologies consider tank-to-wheel scope, an 
adaptation to reflect well-to-wheel should be made. 

When collecting data for the calculation of the respective 
emissions from inland waterway transport, a lot of 
similarities are identified with the sea freight. In terms 
of the weight being transported, the actual weight is 
preferred; where it is unknown, the conversion from 
amount of TEU or FEU to weight is advised. For the 

distance, the total should be calculated using actual 
waterway network distance based on the start and end 
point of the journey. Where nautical miles are used, 
conversion to km is advised. 

To calculate the emissions, apart from activity data, the 
emission intensity is needed. The recommendation is to 
use carrier-specific emission intensity information. If 
this is not available, the GLEC Framework recommends 
specific emission intensity values based on average 
values of empty distance and load factor. These factors 
are based on the use of marine fuel oil. If a different 
fuel or energy is used, then the GLEC default emission 
intensity factors are not applicable. 

Table 8. Recommended inland waterways TOC characteristics

Vessel type

Freight condition

Service information 

• Bulk 
• Container 
• Pallets 
• Mass-limited cargo 
• Volume-limited cargo

4.2.4  Air

• Ambient
• Temperature controlled
• Mixed-ambient and temperature- 

controlled

• Origin-destination information 
• Waterway classification 
• Routing/intermediate stops 
• For convoys, number of barges

When calculating the emissions from air freight, the 
GLEC Framework takes into consideration the emissions 
from the full flight cycle for freight and passenger 
aircraft, for example, taxiing, take-off, cruising, landing, 
as well as any other movement related to freight loading 
and unloading. Any other emissions occurring at 
airports should be covered by factors related to the 
logistics sites. The GLEC Framework provides guidance 
on this, which should be chosen if not more specific data 
is provided from the airport operators. In addition, as it 
is stated for the rest of the modalities, the result of 
emissions from an air freight flight has to be expressed 
in WTW CO2e emissions to be GLEC conformant.

When selecting data for the final calculation, there are 
some crucial parameters to be considered and carefully 
collected. First of all, the distance (with intermediate 
stops if taken) is very important in the activity calculation 
of the transport. What is recommended is to use the 
great-circle distance between the airports. In addition, 
the exact mass of the freight is also needed as this will 

lead to a more accurate result. Emissions shall be split 
between passengers and freight, using the provisions 
outlined in the ISO 14083 standard, which reflects 
provisions of IATA Recommended Practice 1726. Related 
to weight, the load factor is also applicable in air freight 
for both dedicated freighters and passenger aircrafts. The 
load factors should be provided by air freight operators. 

Obtaining accurate flight numbers to identify the exact 
journey can significantly help improve the accuracy of 
emissions calculations as this confirms the distance, 
intermediate stops, and aircraft type. Air freight opera-
tors who own the fleet (proprietary fleets) have the 
benefit of having access to high-quality fuel consump-
tion data and fuel type. It is recommended that these 
data are shared with the parties who have a legitimate 
interest in supporting the calculation of emissions. Fuel 
data can be multiplied by a WTW fuel emission factor. 
Dual fuel use is at the moment negligible (1-2% network 
average), so it is considered acceptable if it is ignored 
from the calculations.

Table 9: Recommended air freight TOC characteristics

Aircraft type

• Freighter/passenger
• Model 
• Engine type

Service information

• Origin-destination information
• Routing/intermediate stops

4. Calculation guidance: Using primary data33

4.2.5  Rail

Globally, rail transport is gaining popularity and has 
been gradually growing the past five years. Rail transport 
can significantly reduce emissions, in particular when 
powered by renewable energy. Mostly the energy is 
either electric or conventional fuels such as diesel. 
Thus, different equipment types require specific 
emission intensity factors. The GLEC Framework uses 
the UIC (International Union of Railways) methodology 
for areas outside the United States, where the method-
ology by EPA SmartWay Rail Carrier Tool is preferred. 
These methodologies and tools are deemed appropriate 
for the modeling of emissions from rail freight.

When calculating rail GHG emissions, specific principles 
should be considered. First and foremost, the most 
important step is to define the engine type (or locomotive) 
and thus, the primary source of energy for the freight 
train. For electric trains, one can investigate the source 

of electricity to specify if it was renewable or not. Then, 
the appropriate emission value for that source can  
be applied. The next step is to find the consignment 
weight. If no data are available, then the weight can be 
approximated using other available proxies, such as 
volume or number of pallets. 

To complete the calculation of activity, the distance also 
needs to be known. In rail transportation, the distance 
should reflect actual rail network distances from the 
beginning and end point taking into account empty 
distance and loading factor. Overall, modeling rail 
transportation is a difficult task due to the lack of data 
and granular default values. Accredited tool providers 
for rail can support this process. 

Note: Emissions from rail terminals are classified as 
emissions from logistics sites.

Table 10: Recommended rail freight TOC characteristics

Engine/locomotive

Cargo type

Cargo density 

Journey type

Activities

• Train size
• Engine class
• UIC class
• % of feedstock

• Bulk (dry/liquid)
• Containers
• Pallets
• Mass/volume limited cargo

• Light
• Medium
• Heavy

• Domestic
• International

• Direct or hub network
• Topography
• Temperature state

4.2.6  Logistics sites (hubs)

Logistics sites, nodes, hubs, and terminals are all 
important steps within a transport chain. The emissions 
are relatively small, but important to incorporate within 
the total GHG calculation to ensure a representative 
picture of the total GHG emissions from the operations.  

The emission intensity of a logistics site is expressed in 
GHG emissions per ton processed or, if considered more 
appropriate, TEU or item. 

Emission intensity factors are limitedly available and are 
yet to be determined in greater detail for many types.  
If emission intensity factors are not available from the 
carrier or terminal operator, default values can be 
obtained from the REff Tool,12 the GLEC Framework  
or other suitable locations. Additional guidance is also 
available by Fraunhofer IML Guide for Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions for Logistics Sites.

Table 11: Recommended logistics site HOC characteristics

Processes

Freight type

Condition (temperature)

• Freight transshipment only 
• Combined passenger and freight transfer 
• Freight transshipment and storage

• Average/mixed 
• Containerized/swap bodies 
• Palletized 
• Piece goods/breakbulk
• Dry bulk 
• Liquid bulk 
• Vehicle transport 
• Other 

• Ambient 
• Temperature controlled

12 REff Tool, developed by IML Fraunhofer: https://reff.iml.fraunhofer.de/ 

4. Calculation guidance: Using primary data 
5. Assurance and 
verification 

35

5. Assurance  

and verification 

To resolve the emissions accounting challenges  
that businesses face today, high-quality (granular,  
comparable consistent) and reliable data must be  
able to be shared across value chains. Assurance  
and verification ensure reliability of data, creating  
the necessary trust among all stakeholders to drive 
decarbonization at scale.

Assurance and verification undertaken by independent 
verifiers can help establish whether emissions have 
been accounted for in compliance with the GLEC 
Framework and other relevant standards and  
accompanying methods.

This section provides guidance on the assurance and 
verification of emissions taking place in the context of 
this Guidance.

5.1 Objectives and scope

5.1.1  Objectives

The overarching objective of this section is to define  
the requirements around assurance and verification  
of emissions in alignment with the accounting  
methodology laid out in this Guidance. 

By clearly defining requirements, this Guidance  
seeks to:

• Establish a common basis and language around  
  assurance for all stakeholders in the ecosystem 
• Increase the uptake of emissions assurance practices  
  across the logistics industry with a multilevel  
  approach 
• Provide clarity on best-practice assurance and  
  verification requirements to support the preparation  
  process for stakeholders wishing to be aligned with  
  best practices 
• Streamline the assurance process by providing  
  guidance on what evidence companies need to  
  prepare for an assurance engagement

5.1.2  Scope and limitations

This Guidance defines three separate assurance 
ambition levels of requirements that companies shall 
refer to when seeking to comply with the requirements 

of this Guidance. The three levels aim to represent 
different degrees of ambition and granularity associated 
with the assurance process to increase emissions data 
reliability and trust in the overall ecosystem. Because 
assurance statements are shared across the value 
chain, companies wishing to distinguish themselves 
through greater data credibility will be incentivized to 
go beyond the minimum ambition level of assurance. 

From a practical standpoint, verified emissions data 
obtained from another logistics supply chain stake-
holder and used for calculations of a company’s own 
emissions reduces the transactional cost of a company’s 
own audit. This is because exchanged emissions do not 
need to be (re)verified as long as no changes are made 
to the underlying calculation models and data used by 
the company that shared the data in the first place.

Finally, this Guidance recognizes that verification of 
emissions disclosures involves many challenges, 
including:

• The limited control of companies over emission  
  sources 
• Assurers’ limited ability to obtain sufficient evidence  
  on all necessary items 
• The evolving scientific consensus on questions  
  directly affecting emissions disclosures, such as  
  emission intensity factors 
• The required subject-matter expertise, which not  
  all companies and assurers may currently have  
  at scale

This Guidance seeks to help mitigate these challenges 
by providing clarity and a reference point. Nonetheless, 
companies and assurers should continue to collaborate 
to assure their emissions to the best of their knowledge 
and to continue to improve emissions disclosure 
assurance practices throughout the logistics sector. 

It should also be noted that this chapter by itself is not 
intended to be used as an assurance standard. This 
Guidance defines the requirements and proposed 
outcomes of the assurance process (i.e., the “what”  
of assurance) but does not prescribe the assurance 
process itself (i.e., the “how” of the assurance process). 
Assurance providers should therefore refer to additional 
assurance standards when verifying logistics emissions 
and the methodology presented in this Guidance. 

5.  Assurance and verification  
 
36

Finally, this chapter exclusively provides guidance around assurance and verification. Companies seeking  
accreditation should refer to Smart Freight Centre’s Accreditation program. While assurance and accreditation are 
related, accreditation seeks to determine whether a company’s calculation methodology aligns with the GLEC 
Framework, while an assurance process seeks to determine whether a specific emissions disclosure is accurately 
calculated and stated. 

5.2 Assurance ambition levels 

5.2.1  Structure

This Guidance is structured as a framework consisting of three ambition levels, each one encompassing  
requirements across eight assurance dimensions, as shown in Figure 8, and building on the Pathfinder Framework.

Figure 8: Ambition levels and dimensions of the assurance requirements

Decision points

Ambition levels

Process elements

Start

Yes

Bronze

Emission 
Intensity 
available by 
carrier?
Lower ambition level

Use it to 
calculate the 
emissions

Silver

Use it to 
calculate 
emissions*

Mid-ambition level

Gold

Use actual 
distance

Higher ambition level

No

Yes

Yes

Use Clean 
Cargo
(average / 
Carrier) 
emission 
intensity per 
port pair**

Assurance dimensions

Yes

Is the vessel
 a container 
ship?

Coverage

Section 5.2.3
No

Provider

Section 5.2.7

Shipment 
weight 
known?

Distance data 
known?

Conformance

Section 5.2.4

No

Check GLEC 
Module 2 or 
IMO for default 
intensity 
values for 
ships / fuels

Process cycle

Section 5.2.8

Boundary

Section 5.2.5

SMEs requirements

Use standard 
approach to 
average net 
weights*

Section 5.3

No

Section 5.2.6

Use planned 
distance & 
Evidence
add 15% 
Distance 
Section 5.4
Adjustment 
Factor

Report 
emission 
intensity & 
total emissions 
in tkm / 
TEUkm

Verification level

5.  Assurance and verification  
 
 
37

5.2.2  Overview

The following table presents an overview of this Guidance’s assurance requirements for the three levels by dimension: 

Table 12: Assurance levels overview

Decision points

Dimensions

Process elements

3     Bronze

2     Silver

1     Gold

Yes

StartCoverage

Emission 
Intensity 
available by 
Extent of the data 
carrier?
to be assured

Yes

No
Conformance

Basis for the 
assurance
Is the vessel
 a container 
ship?

Boundary

Depth of data 
No
to be assured

Level

Degree of 
confidence

Provider

Entity providing 
the assurance

Process cycle

Temporal validity of 
the assurance

Application to SMEs

SME requirements

Evidence

Guidance for

Use it to 
calculate the 
emissions

Own operations

Use it to 
calculate 
emissions*

Own operations + 
contracted operations

Use actual 
Own + contracted + 
distance
sub-contracted 
operations

Yes

Yes

Any recognized standard

GLEC Framework

Use Clean 
Cargo
(average / 
Carrier) 
emission 
intensity per 
port pair**

Shipment 
weight 
known?

GLEC Framework

Distance data 
known?

Well-to-wheel

Well-to-wheel

No

No

Well-to-wheel

Report 
emission 
intensity & 
total emissions 
in tkm / 
TEUkm

Check GLEC 
Module 2 or 
IMO for default 
intensity 
values for 
ships / fuels

Limited assurance

Use standard 
approach to 
average net 
weights*

Limited assurance

Use planned 
distance & 
add 15% 
Reasonable assurance
Distance 
Adjustment 
Factor

Independent Third Party

Independent Third Party

Independent Third Party

Biannual

Annual

Annual

Phased-in approach for SMEs

All requirements above identically apply to SMEs but with a two-year time lag 
to allow for capacity building until 2025

Evidence Pack Guidance

Companies should use guidance around evidence consolidation (see Appendix) 
to facilitate and streamline the assurance process

To interpret and decide the level of assurance to be 
undertaken, the above requirements shall be seen as  
a checklist where all conditions must be satisfied  
(“and” relationship) to meet any given level. For example, 

an assurance cannot be ranked as “Gold” if all other 
conditions are met, but the assurance level is “Limited.” 
The following sections provide further details on each 
dimension and requirement.

5.  Assurance and verification  
      
38

strongly encourages conformance with the GLEC 
Framework as well as additional recognized standards, 
such as the upcoming ISO 14083. 

Gold 
Companies shall follow the same requirements as in the 
silver level.

5.2.5  Boundary

The boundary of the assurance defines the depth of the 
data to be assured. In line with the GLEC Framework, 
companies will need to include within their assurance 
process all WTW logistics emissions. This requirement 
applies to all three ambition levels.

5.2.6  Level of assurance

The level of assurance defines the degree of confidence 
in the assurance statement. While this Guidance defines 
the level of assurance for the three ambition levels, 
companies should work closely with assurers to deter-
mine which assurance level is appropriate and feasible in 
any given situation. Box 1 provides further context on 
assurance levels.13

Bronze 
Companies are required to seek limited assurance.

Silver 
Companies shall follow the same requirements as in the 
bronze level

Gold 
Companies shall seek reasonable assurance to fulfill the 
requirements of this Guidance. 

5.2.3  Coverage

The coverage of the assurance defines the extent of 
emissions to be included in the assurance process.  
While the emissions exchanged under this Guidance  
are expected to result in end-to-end emissions, the 
boundary of the assurance can be broader, narrower,  
or equal to the emissions shared. For the purpose of 
assurance, this Guidance categorizes the coverage into 
three separate levels: own, contracted, and sub-contracted 
operations. Sub-contracting refers to the multitiered 
process of contracting another party when the stake-
holder (i.e., Carrier A) that was initially chosen by the 
shipper is unable to conduct a shipment within their own 
capacity. Thus, subcontracting is the act of assigning a 
carrier (i.e., Carrier B) outside the initial one (Carrier A).

Bronze 
Companies shall assure their own operations’ emissions. 

Silver 
Companies shall assure their own operations and 
contracted operations. 

Gold 
Companies shall assure their own operations and 
contracted and subcontracted operations.

Please note that the verification process will both assure 
the calculations made and the underlying data. Therefore, 
while the primary activity data of subcontracted and 
contracted operations may be more difficult to collect and 
sometimes unavailable, companies are still expected to 
estimate these emissions using default or modeled data.

5.2.4  Conformance

The conformance of the assurance defines the  
reference standard or guidance to be used for the 
assurance process. 

Bronze 
Companies shall use any recognized emissions  
accounting standard as the basis for the logistics 
emissions assurance. 

Silver 
Companies shall use the GLEC Framework as the basis 
for assurance. Companies may be required to undertake 
additional assurance steps to ensure conformance with 
other existing standards or regulations, for example, to 
meet regulatory requirements. This Guidance therefore 

13 Retrieved from ISAE 3000 and related standards such as ISAE 3410.

5.  Assurance and verification 39

Box 1. Assurance levels

Why?
To ensure all stakeholders understand the degree 
to which emissions disclosures have been verified. 
The goal is to enable:

• Companies to plan the assurance process and 

depth of verification they desire

• Assurers to prepare the verification according to 

standardized practices

• External stakeholders, such as downstream 

companies, to understand the reliability of the 
reported data

emissions disclosures contain any material 
misstatement based on the applicable criteria. 

• Reasonable: The conclusion of a reasonable  

level of assurance is framed in a positive sense, 
indicating that, according to the assurer,  
the emissions disclosures have been prepared 
according to the applicable criteria in all material 
aspects.

Table 13 provides an additional overview of the 
different characteristics of the two levels. 

What?
There are two assurance levels commonly used in 
emissions disclosure assurance:

• Limited: The conclusion of a limited level of 

assurance is framed in a negative sense, indicating 
that the assurer did not find any evidence that the 

How?
Companies should define which level of assurance 
they are going to seek before an assurance 
engagement, in line with the requirements set by 
this Guidance. The assurance provider may suggest 
adjustments if they believe the desired level will not 
be feasible (provided that the minimum 
requirements of this Guidance are met).

Table 13: Assurance levels comparison

Ambition levels

Level

Aspects

Limited assurance

Reasonable assurance

Opinion statements

Negative

Positive

Application

Process

“Nothing has come to our attention 
that the assurance statement does 
not conform with the Pathfinder 
Framework and contains material 
misstatements”

“In our opinion the disclosure 
conforms with all Pathfinder 
requirements and is fairly stated in 
all material aspects”

Commonly used for non-financial 
disclosure

Commonly used in financial 
disclosures

Limited in scope - different or 
fewer checks than reasonable 
assurance

More expansive in scope, e.g., 
potentially including site visits

5.  Assurance and verification 40

5.2.7  Provider

The provider of the assurance is the entity that verifies 
the emissions data. When the reporting company also 
performs the assurance, this is known as first-party 
assurance. When a party other than the reporting 
company performs the assurance, this is known as 
third-party assurance.14 

Companies shall choose an independent third party to 
conduct the verification process. While first-party 
quality controls and plausibility checks are encouraged, 
they do not suffice to fulfill the assurance requirements 
of this Guidance.

Companies may choose any qualified assurance 
provider, given that the provider meets the required 
expertise to conduct an assurance engagement. Proof 
of such expertise may include previous assurance 
engagements around logistics emissions, industry-specific 
knowledge, and technical capabilities in carbon 
accounting. Section 5.5.3 provides additional details on 
criteria to consider when selecting an assurance provider.

5.2.8  Process cycle

The process cycle defines the validity period of the 
assurance statement (e.g., one year or more).

Bronze 
Companies are required to renew the assurance at 
least biannually. 

Silver 
The assurance statement shall be valid for a maximum 
of one year. The requirement for an annual renewal of 
assurance on the corporate level aims to be aligned 
with regulatory requirements such as the EU’s Corporate 
Sustainability Disclosure Directive (CSRD) and the US 
Securities and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) proposed 
rules on nonfinancial disclosures.

Gold 
Companies shall follow the same requirements as in 
the silver level.

5.3 Requirements for SMEs
While this Guidance encourages any company to assure 
its emissions data according to one of the three levels 
laid out in Section 5.3, small and medium-sized  

enterprises (SMEs)15 may face additional challenges in 
meeting assurance requirements due to initial resource 
and capability constraints. 

To give SMEs time to build the necessary capabilities to 
fulfill assurance requirements, each requirement as 
defined in Section 5.2.2 shall become applicable for 
SMEs two years after the requirement will first come 
into force for larger corporates, in 2025.

While the assurance levels will not be considered 
requirements until then, it is strongly encouraged that 
SMEs begin to prepare to meet the assurance require-
ments sooner than they are required to by this Guidance. 

5.4 Evidence

5.4.1  Context and purpose

The provision of standardized and relevant evidence to 
substantiate emissions claims and support the assur-
ance process is the cornerstone of any verification and 
assurance process. 

This section is therefore meant to guide companies’ 
efforts to gather and organize the evidence that might 
be required in an assurance engagement. This Guidance 
does not replace any guidance that assurers themselves 
may provide during an engagement and is not a blueprint 
for an assurance engagement. Rather, it is meant to 
help companies prepare for an assurance engagement 
ahead of time, speeding up and streamlining the 
assurance process. 

5.4.2  Structure and dimensions

The Guidance on evidence is structured along three 
dimensions central to verifying emissions disclosures: 
1   Data: Evidence around the required data elements, 
sources, and quality of data used in the calculations

2   Methodology: Evidence around the calculation 

steps, results, and assumptions

3   Governance: Evidence around the underlying 

processes used during the calculations, including 
how data was stored, how quality was ensured, and 
how risks were mitigated

15 In the context of this Guidance, SMEs are defined in accordance with the latest EU recommendation 2006/361 criteria and thresholds, 

where SMEs are defined as companies that employ fewer than 250 persons and have an annual turnover not exceeding  
€50 million, and/or an annual balance sheet total not exceeding €43 million.

5.  Assurance and verification  
41

Each dimension contains five concrete elements that 
constitute the evidence pack for that dimension. As the 
maturity of companies’ emissions accounting reporting 
varies, the evidence pack distinguishes between 
minimum and optional elements that may bring further 
clarity to the assurance process. 

before the result is reported or exchanged with other 
stakeholders. Given that the verification process may 
take time, depending on the complexity of the underlying 
emissions disclosure, it is the company’s responsibility 
to start the assurance process early enough to avoid 
delays in data exchange. 

5.4.3  Evidence pack

The provision of standardized and relevant evidence to 
substantiate emissions claims and support the assur-
ance process is the cornerstone of any verification and 
assurance process. 

5.5 Process and reporting

5.5.1  Choosing an ambition level

Before beginning the assurance process, companies 
should define the desired assurance ambition level. 
While the more ambitious assurance levels are  
encouraged, companies may choose any assurance 
ambition level as long as they communicate transparently 
which level was chosen. The considerations in choosing 
an ambition level are highly context dependent, but key 
factors may include:

• The reporting company’s emissions disclosure  
  maturity (i.e., the degree to which emissions accounting  
  practices and processes have been established in the  
  company) 
• The use case of the emissions data to be assured,  
  such as reporting or impact assessment 
• The assurance needs of data users receiving the  
  emissions data  
• Resource and time constraints, for example when the  
  data is meant to be shared with others

Companies are also encouraged to discuss their desired 
assurance ambition level with potential assurance 
providers to better understand the feasibility of the 
ambition level and any steps to be undertaken to reach 
the desired level. 

5.5.2  Timing

Assurance engagements in the context of this Guidance 
shall begin after the result to be assured, such as a 
transport-chain element, has been calculated and 

It may be the case that reporting companies need to 
share emissions data before it has been assured, for 
example, to meet contractual obligations or because 
the timing of the disclosure is predetermined. Companies 
may share data that has not been assured as long as 
they transparently communicate with data users to 
what extent the data has undergone assurance. 

5.5.3  Requirements for choosing assurance 
providers

While this Guidance does not include specific require-
ments around choosing an assurance provider, the 
following criteria may be used to select assurance 
providers:

• Expertise and experience: 

-  Proven experience conducting assurance  
  engagements and applying assurance standards 
-  Capabilities around life cycle assessment and  
  carbon accounting, as shown by experience,  
  educational qualifications, and tools used

• Industry and sectoral knowledge: 

-  Understanding of the logistics industry 
-  Understanding of business operations within the  
  sector to which the product or corporation belong

• Credibility: 

-  Proof of no conflicts of interest between  
  assurance provider and reporting company 
-  Proof of successful conduction of verification  
  processes

• Capacity:  

-  Enough staff capacity to conduct the assurance  
  engagement.

5.5.4  Reporting

In line with the Greenhouse Gas Protocol Product 
Standard, companies shall include the assurance 
statement in the emissions disclosure. An assurance 
statement, at the minimum, shall include:

5.  Assurance and verification  
 
 
 
 
42

5.5.5  Special cases of existing assurance

It may be the case that a company needs to verify 
carbon emissions disclosure for purposes other than 
adherence to this Guidance, for example, to fulfill 
reporting or regulatory requirements. If verification  
has already taken place, even if not for the purposes of 
end-to-end GHG reporting, the resulting assurance may 
be used toward the assurance requirements of this 
Guidance, provided that the existing assurance conforms 
to, as a minimum, the bronze level requirements at the 
time the assurance was undertaken. 

• The assurer’s assertion

• The level of assurance

• The assurance provider’s name and the executing 

individuals

• A summary of the assurance process and work 

performed

• The relevant expertise of the assurer

• Any potential conflicts of interest

• The assurance standard applied, if any

• A list of criteria that were evaluated to reach the 

assertion.

The reporting format will depend on the applicable 
requirements, particularly the coverage requirements.

Companies shall report the assurance statement 
alongside the emissions disclosure, such as in a 
sustainability report.

5.  Assurance and verification 6. How to: Supplier-to-

customer end-to-end 
GHG reporting 

44

6. How to: Supplier-to-
  customer end-to-end  

GHG reporting

• Distances are calculated using planned distance for 
road, rail, sea, and inland waterways, and using 
great-circle distance for aviation between loading and 
unloading stations using appropriate mapping 
software. If actual (traveled) distances are used, the 
transport activity needs to be adjusted to allow for 
incidental detours and not to underreport emissions. 

• Data quality is expressed in a number between 4 and 

1 for a single consignment of a single TCE. 

• Assurance is designed in 8 dimensions and has 
different ambition levels to meet organizational 
requirements. 

• An accredited partner is recommended to help 

advance calculations, allocations, and reporting. 

• Additional guidance can be found in the ISO 14083 and 

the GLEC Framework. 

6.1 Overarching tips
When undergoing the process of calculating emissions 
as suggested in Section 4.1, note the following:

• A TOC or HOC consists of multiple vehicles and trips 

or buildings respectively over a period of time  
(at least one month). A TCE is a single transport leg.  
A transport chain consists of multiple transport  
chain elements.

• A difference is made in the calculation, allocation (by 
mass, items, or TEUs), and reporting of emissions. 

• Transport activity and emission intensity shall be 

reported in ton-kilometers. In specific circumstances, 
alternative reporting metrics can be chosen. For mail 
and parcel sectors, this can be reporting in item- 
kilometers and in the container industry, reporting  
in TEU-kilometers.

• Mass refers to the actual mass and not the “chargeable 
weight”, including the producer’s own packaging,  
but not the packaging required by the transporter. 
Mass should be known or if not, approximate using 
standard product categories.

6.2 Example

Figure 9: Example of an end-to-end supply chain

Parcel of 12 kg from Taiwan to Los Angeles

Transport 
chain

TCE 1

TCE 2

Precarriage 
to Port

Container 
Terminal

TCE 3

Sea leg

TCE 4

TCE 5

TCE 6

TCE 7

Container 
Terminal

Rail leg

Distribution 
Center

Final mile 
distribution

6. Supplier-to-customer end-to-end GHG reporting – example45

Organization ‘A-to-Z’ has moved a 12kg parcel traveling from Toufen, Taiwan to a customer in Kansas City and 
wants to understand which portion of the transport has the highest emission intensity and opportunity to reduce. 
The organization is a Clean Cargo member and has details from its operations in Taiwan and from its last-mile 
delivery partner, but no other information available. This would result in the calculation below. 

Table 14. Example calculation of an end-to-end supply chain  

TCE

TOC

1. Toufen,  
Taiwan 
– Port of 
Taipei

Truck, 
less-than-
truckload, 
ambient

Data  
visibility

Full  
visibility

Data  
availability

Emission 
 intensity

Transport activity and 
emissions

Data quality 

Primary disaggregated 
fuel consumption for 
loaded and empty trips

Emissions: 30L * 
3.24kgCO2e/L = 97.2kgCO2e 
for loaded distance

Transport activity: 
12kg * 100kms = 1.2tkm

1. Excellent

Emissions: 
1.2tkm * 101gCO2e = 
121gCO2e

Data used: 
• Diesel truck 
• Fuel consumption: 

30L/100km when full, 
25l/100km when empty
• 100 kms loaded distance 

and 30 kms empty
• Average load of 12t 
• Fuel emission factor of 

3.24kgCO2e/L.

Liters empty running 30 * 
25/100 = 7.5L

Emissions empty = 7.5 * 
3.24 = 24.3kgCO2e

Total Loaded + empty 
emissions = 121.5kgCO2e

121.5kgCO2e/(100km * 
12kg) = 101gCO2e/tkm

2. Port of 
Taipei

Container 
terminal

No  
visibility

Container terminal  
operation inferred due  
to modal shift. 

30.1kgCO2e/container.
1 standard container (TEU) 
= 10t

3. Port of  
Taipei 
– Port 
of Long 
Beach

Container 
vessel

Clean 
Cargo 
member

4. Port of 
Long 
Beach

Container 
terminal

Container 
terminal

5. Port of 
Long 
Beach – 
Kansas 
City

Rail, no 
other 
details

Default 
values via 
ERTAC 
available

Data used:
• Default data from GLEC 

Framework used

• Conversion from TEU to 

tonnes

Program data from Clean 
Cargo on a trade-lane or 
port-pair basis
Data used:
• Carrier-specific data 

from Clean Cargo used 
(74gCO2e/TEUkm)
• Distance is 10,960km

Container terminal opera-
tion inferred due to modal 
shift

Data used: 
• Default data from GLEC 

Framework used

• Conversion from TEU 

to tons

Only activity data is known 
in tkm. ERTAC data is 
available.

Data used:
• Data from GLEC Frame-

work used

• Used ERTAC-specific 

value from the carrier: 
17gCO2e/tkm

• Distance is 2,600km.

74gCO2e/TEUkm 

3. Sufficient

2. Good

Transport activity: 
12kg

Emissions: 
12kg / 10t * 30.1kg = 
36.12gCO2e

Transport activity: 
10,960TEUkm * 12kg / 
10t = 13,152tkm

Emissions:
10,960TEUkm * 
74gCO2e = 811kgCO2e 
for 1 TEU

(12kg / 10t) * 811.04 = 
973.25gCO2e for 12 kg 
parcel

30.1kgCO2e/container.
1 standard container (TEU) 

Transport activity:
12kg

3. Sufficient

= 10t

Emissions:
12kg / 10t * 30.1kg = 
36.12gCO2e.

17gCO2e/tkm from ERTAC

3. Sufficient

Transport activity:
12kgs * 2,600km = 
31.2tkm

Emissions:
31.2tkm * 17gCO2e/tkm 
= 530gCO2e

6. Supplier-to-customer end-to-end GHG reporting – example46

Table 14. Example calculation of an end-to-end supply chain  

TCE

TOC

Data  
visibility

Data  
availability

6. Kansas 
City

Distribution  
center

No  
visibility

Last-mile 
Delivery

Limited 
visibility 

7. Kansas 
City – 
Kansas 
City  
(address)

Transshipment center  
inferred due to modal 
shift.

Data used: 
• Default data from GLEC 

Framework used

• 3.4kgCO2e/t.

Modeled fuel consumption 
for loaded trip – industry 
average empty trip ratio 
calculated

Data used:
• Fuel consumption when 
loaded = 20L/100km and 
18L/100km when empty 

• 20 km loaded distance 

and empty km unknown 
(17% empty running fac-
tor used)

• Empty Distance of 

4,09kms 

• Average load of 3t
• Fuel emission factor of 

3,24kgCO2e/L

Transport activity and 
emissions

Data quality 

3. Sufficient

Transport activity: 
12kg

Emissions: 
12kg * 3.4kg/t = 
40.8gCO2e

Transport activity: 
12kg * 20kms = 0.24tkm

2. Good

Emissions: 
0.24tkm * 256gCO2e = 
61.44gCO2e

Emission 
 intensity

3.4kgCO2e/t

Emissions: 4L * 3.24Kg-
CO2e/L= 12.96 kgCO2e for 
loaded distance

Liters empty running 
20km / (1-17%) - 100km * 
18L/100= 0.74L

Emissions empty = 0.74L * 
3.24 = 2.39kgCO2e
Total Loaded + empty 
emissions = 15.35kgCO2e

15.35kgCO2e / (20km * 3t) 
= 256gCO2e/tkm

Overall 
Taipei 
–Kansas 
City

Overall emission intensity: 
1,798.73gCO2e / 164.16tkm 

= 

10,96gCO2/tkm

Total transport activity:
164.16tkm

Total emissions:
1,799gCO2e

Weighted  
Average of 
the data  
quality: 
2.29 Good

(121gCO2e * 
1 Excellent + 
36.1 * 3  
Sufficient 
… 61.44 * 
2. Good) / 
1,799gCO2e = 
2.29

6. Supplier-to-customer end-to-end GHG reporting – example47

6.3 Reporting/declaring emissions
The results of the calculations can finally be used for reporting and declaring emissions. The results can be used to 
help understand and optimize their supply chains. The principles of the GLEC Declaration are followed for this, with 
the additional requirement to report the data quality indicator.

Any transport operator shall therefore report to the shipper the following key metrics:

• Total emissions of the transport chain/TCE 
• Transport activity of the transport chain/TCE 
• Data quality indicator of each transport chain/TCE 
• Emission intensity of each TOC/HOC 
• Data quality indicator of each TOC/HOC 
• Definitions of the used TOC/HOC. 

This can be reported at the company, transport chain, and/or TCE level. Digital exchange of emissions shall follow 
the guidance of the GLEC Data Access and Exchange project.

Figure 10: Example transport chain with reporting requirements

End-to-End

Transport chain

Pre- Carriage 
to Port

Port to Port 
Main Leg 

Inland Trans-
shipment 

Rail Terminal 
(or port) to 
Regional DC

Regional(cid:31)
DC to 
Warehouse

Warehouse to 
Store / End 
Customer

TCE 1

TCE 2

TCE 3

TCE 4

TCE 5

TCE 6

TCE 7

TCE 8

TCE 9

TCE 10

TCE 11

Keyresults:
• Activity (tkm)
• Emissions (kgCO2e)
• Emission Intensity 
   (kgCO2e/tkm)
• Data Quality indicator

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

6. Supplier-to-customer end-to-end GHG reporting – example7.  Outlook

7. Outlook

49

Together we can decarbonize logistics. This requires a 
shared understanding and transparency of the emissions 
across the supply chains. This Guidance provides a 
step-by-step practical approach to calculate logistics 
emissions end-to-end – from an initial supplier to a 
final customer – compliant with existing methodologies.

• Piloting and testing the Guidance in operational 

situations and across multiple use cases. The newly 
introduced data quality indicator and the assurance 
process may be refined to ensure they continue to 
reflect the progress and maturity of the industry while 
also increasing ambition for change.

We need to recognize that granular visibility of logistics 
operations and sharing of logistics emissions data from 
primary sources is not yet a reality or common practice. 
The Guidance seeks to reflect this and ensure more 
transparency can be embedded within daily business 
practice nonetheless. It is also designed to encourage 
companies to improve their data granularity, quality 
and reliability over time as well as enable them to share 
data seamless across the supply chain.

To drive the process of adoption, Smart Freight  
Centre and WBCSD will support organizations in this 
journey by:

• Establishing and designing the associated IT  

infrastructure to enable exchange of product carbon 
footprints from logistics operations across the supply 
chain consistent with this Guidance and in line with 
the work undertaken by PACT.

• Collaborating with supply chain partners and solution 
providers to deliver concrete decarbonization projects 
and tracking their impact using this Guidance.

We are encouraged by the collaboration shown in the 
development of this Guidance and are committed to 
meet the Paris Agreement and achieve net zero  
|ogistics, together.

7. OutlookAppendix:  
Assurance  
evidence pack

Appendix

51

Appendix:  
Assurance evidence pack

This evidence pack contains the information that 
companies should consolidate ahead of undergoing 
emissions assurance in conformance with this Guidance.

The evidence pack is structured along three dimensions 
of evidence central to verifying emissions-related 
disclosures: 
1   Data: Evidence around the required data elements, 
sources, and quality of data used in the calculations

2   Methodology: Evidence around the calculation 

steps, results, and assumptions

3   Governance: Evidence around the underlying 

processes used during the calculations, including 
how data was stored, how quality was ensured, and 
how risks were mitigated

Each dimension is subdivided into five elements that 
constitute the evidence pack for that dimension. As the 
maturity of companies’ emissions disclosures varies, 
the evidence pack distinguishes between elements that 
are likely to be needed at a minimum and elements that 
might be optional as evidence.

Appendix

52

1. Data

Element

Description

Minimum

Optional

Data 
collection

Primary 
Data 
Sources

Default 
Data 
Sources

In order to perform an emissions 
calculation, companies are 
expected to identify all relevant 
GHG sources and map the activity 
data available for each

Inventory of all relevant 
activity data: weight, 
distance, mode of 
transport, consignement

Load factor, level of 
vehicle details

Understanding which of the GHG 
sources have been calculated via 
primary data collection is one of 
the key purposes of the 
End-to-End GHG reporting 
guidance

Comprehensive list of all 
primary data sources 
used, including biogenic 
emissions certificates, 
if any

Additional information 
on how and when the 
data was accessed

Companies downstream want to 
ensure that default data used for 
the calculation comes from 
credible and globally recognized 
sources

Comprehensive list of all 
default data sources 
used

Additional information 
on how and when the 
data was accessed

Modelled 
data

Should primary and default data 
sources not cover the entirety of 
the studied emissions, modelled 
data can be used to fill in the gaps

List of modelled data 
used and rationale of 
application

Steps taken to ensure 
that modelled data used 
is minimized in future

Data Quality

Companies will need to give 
evidence of the data quality 
assessment statement and the 
steps taken to calculate its data 
quality ratings

Results of PCF GHG 
sources materiality 
threshold assessment 

Overall data quality 
assessment statement

An individual data quality 
statement for each GHG 
source surpassing the 
materiality

Appendix

53

2. Methodology

Element

Description

Minimum

Optional

Conformance

Standards followed will define the 
framework requirements and thus 
the correctness of the steps taken 
by companies to calculate the PCF

Companies will need to 
demonstrate alignment to scope 
boundary conditions prescribed 
by the Framework

Comprehensive 
checklist of standard(s) 
requirements followed

NA

List of scope boundary 
conditions

Calculation 
steps

It is essential for companies to be 
able to specify which calculation 
method has been followed and 
produce a list of calculation steps 
taken to convert logistics activity 
data into GHG emissions

Selected calculation 
approach and 
comprehensive list 
of calculation steps

Assumptions

A list of assumptions used 
in calculation to ensure 
completeness of calculation (e.g., 
empty running assumptions)

Comprehensive list of 
assumptions made at 
each stage

NA

NA

Allocation 
(optional)

Results

Need to understand whether 
allocation has taken place to 
divide emissions to each item 
within a transport vehicle, and if 
so, what approach was used

Description of allocation 
approach followed

NA

Results will allow verification 
parties to understand whether the 
calculation steps required by the 
standard have been completed 
accurately

Comprehensive list of 
all intermediate and 
final results

NA

Appendix

54

3. Governance

Element

Description

Minimum

Optional

Data 
Governance

Quality 
Control

Expertise

Capacity

In order to ensure replicability and 
facilitate knowledge transfer, 
companies should have in place 
a data governance plan mapping 
the data processes, ownership 
and responsibilities, as well as 
documentation on the steps taken 
to consolidate and validate 
different data inputs, e.g., from 
different sites

Internal mechanism in place to 
ensure quality control takes place 
and that responsibilities associat-
ed to it are clear

There is a need to ensure that the 
team employed to undergo the 
calculation process has sufficient 
expertise in the subject in order to 
minimize emission misstatements

When asked, companies should be 
able to list internal and contracted 
team members (if any) responsi-
ble for the product footprint 
calculations

Comprehensive 
map of all processes and 
responsibilities

NA

Comprehensive list of all 
data consolidation steps 
and rationale

NA

NA

NA

Comprehensive list 
of controls and 
responsibilities

Total years of expertise 
within team employed to 
undergo emissions 
calculation

List of all responsible 
individuals

Risk 
Management

Companies need to be able to 
identify potential shortcomings 
or pitfalls associated to the PCF 
calculation process in order to 
be able to address them

Comprehensive list of 
all risks and mitigation 
tactics

Progress against 
mitigation tactics 
employed

Smart Freight
Centre

Led by Smart Freight Centre

