SFC Exchange Network 

Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 

August 2023 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network  
Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
August 2023 

© Smart Freight Centre, 2023 
Suggested  citation:  Smart  Freight  Centre,  Think-it  and  British  Standards  Institution.  SFC  Exchange  Network  – 
Proof of Concept Evaluation Report. 2023. 
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in any form for educational or non-profit purposes without special permission from 
the copyright holder, provided acknowledgment of the source is made. Smart Freight Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of any 
publication that uses SFC Exchange Network as a source.  No use of this publication may be made for resale or for any other commercial 
purpose whatsoever, without prior permission in writing from Smart Freight Centre. 

Disclaimer 
The  views  expressed  in  this  publication  are  those  of  Smart  Freight  Centre  and  its  staff,  consultants  and 
management, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Trustees of Smart Freight Centre. Smart 
Freight Centre is not responsible for the consequence of the use of data included in this publication. 

About Smart Freight Centre 
Smart Freight Centre is an international non-profit organization focused on reducing greenhouse gas emissions from freight transportation. 
Smart Freight Centre’s vision is an efficient and zero emission global logistics sector. Smart Freight Centre’s mission is to collaborate with 
the organization’s global partners to quantify impacts, identify solutions, and propagate logistics decarbonization strategies. Smart Freight 
Centre’s  goal  is  to  guide  the  global  logistics  industry  in  tracking  and  reducing  the  industry’s  greenhouse  gas  emissions  by  one  billion 
tonnes by 2030 and to reach zero emissions by 2050 or earlier, consistent with a 1.5°C future. 

Contact 
Smart Freight Centre 
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Technology Partner 

Think-it is a software engineering collective. Their mission is to leverage technology to regenerate our planet and advance human potential. 
They are pioneers in the operationalization of data space connectors, making sovereign data exchange a reality. Their cutting-edge cross-
disciplinary approach is advancing a more sustainable future.  

Knowledge Partners 

BSI (British Standards Institution) is a non-profit distributing organization and offers global services in the linked fields of standardization, 
systems assessment, product certification, training and advisory services. BSI has worked with SFC and the SFC Exchange Network 
consortia in advising on an initial risk-based controls framework for the PoC phase. 

McKinsey Sustainability is the firm’s client-service platform with the goal of helping all industry sectors reach net zero carbon emissions 
by 2050 and to cut emissions by half by 2030. 

The SINE Foundation is a tech for good non-profit which supports global organizations in establishing and maintaining data collaboration 
initiatives within complex multi-stakeholder environments through ready-to-use governance tools and open-source software.  

Acknowledgements 
This Proof of Concept evaluation report about the SFC Exchange Network project was written by Smart Freight Centre with contributions 
by  Think-it  and  BSI.  The  authors  wish  to  thank  partners  from  the  logistics  industry,  representing  shippers,  logistics  service  providers, 
carriers  and  technology  solution  providers  who  collaborated  on  the  development  of  the  evaluation  report  for  their  valuable  insights, 
expertise, and contributions. We would also like to thank The Climate Pledge for its partnership and support of this publication. 

Participants and contributors 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Contents 

1 

Business Value 

1.1 
1.2 

Project Team 
Project Participants 

2  Governance 

PoC Governance 

2.1  Organizational Governance 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 

Intermediate Post-PoC Governance 
Future Governance 

3 

Technology 

3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 

SFC Exchange Network – API 

The Eclipse Dataspace Components (EDC) Connector at the heart 
Testing Process 

SFC Exchange Network PoC Architecture – Showcasing the exchange of data

4 

Assurance Framework and Approach 

4.1 
4.2 
4.3 

Pillar 1: Member 
Pillar 2: Technology 

Pillar 3: Data 

5 

Evaluation 

5.1 

Evaluation Outcomes 

6 

7 

8 

9 

Conclusion 

Recommendations 

Bibliography 

Appendix 

9.1 
9.2 

Technology choices 

Assurance Framework and Approach – NIST details 

7 

7 
8 

9 

9 
10 
11 
12 

14 

14 
15 
15 

16 

18 

19 
19 
20 

22 

22 

25 

26 

28 

29 

29 
33 

August 2023 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

List of tables 

Table 1: Overview of the assurance framework .......................................................................... 18 
Table 2: Key terms ...................................................................................................................... 18 
Table 3: Overall impression and experience ............................................................................... 23 
Table 4: API documentation and testing ..................................................................................... 23 
Table 5: Security and performance ............................................................................................. 23 
Table 6: PoC Evaluation and Expectations ................................................................................. 23 
Table 7: Post PoC and Implementation ...................................................................................... 24 
Table 8: Recommendations ........................................................................................................ 26 

List of figures 

Figure 1: “The 3 Ps of Data Governance” by (Verhulst & Young , Governing the Environment-
Related Data Space, n.d.) ........................................................................................................... 10 
Figure 2: PoC Governance ......................................................................................................... 11 
Figure 3: Post - PoC Governance ............................................................................................... 12 
Figure 4: Future Governance Options ........................................................................................ 13 
Figure 5: Preparing the data exchange ....................................................................................... 17 
Figure 6: The consumer requests data from a provider .............................................................. 17 

August 2023 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Executive Summary 

The logistics industry faces numerous challenges attaining overall visibility on greenhouse gas 
(GHG) related information from transport chains. Starting with siloed data, limited availability and 
the  difficulties  in  the  exchange  of  data,  these  challenges  are  structural  and  known  within  the 
industry.  Another  major  challenge  is  the  lack  of  trust.  This  creates  a  huge  barrier  in  the  shift 
towards the decarbonization, as transport value chains are highly interdependent and intertwined 
across the many stakeholders within.  

To alleviate this, the SFC Exchange Network was initiated with the aim to facilitate emissions data 
exchange based on data space principles through collective efforts. The SFC Exchange Network 
is a sociotechnical project composed of multi-stakeholders with the aim to encourage and promote 
data sharing between transport value chain actors & strive towards carbon transparency. The first 
major  stride  towards  this  target  is  completed  with  the  Proof  of  Concept  (PoC).  This  inaugural 
phase  delivered  a  working  technology  prototype  with  ingrained  key  pillars  of  governance, 
technology and assurance.  

 As  a  sociotechnical  project,  the  SFC  Exchange  Network  is  defined  by  its  governance  and 
assurance characteristics to ensure data space principles such as data sovereignty and security 
are upheld and maintained. An exploration of potential governance structures and a suggestion 
for current and future options is conducted. In terms of technological development, a technological 
prototype  was  developed  and  tested,  based  on  principles  for  decentralized  exchanges  and 
previous work on semantics by SFC. Lastly, a preliminary assurance framework is proposed for 
an assurance process to meet the objectives of such a network while ensuring trust in the data 
exchange. 

The contribution from this Proof of Concept to the logistics industry is three-fold. Firstly, the project 
has been collaboratively formulated by the project stakeholders proving the need to strengthen 
collaboration  within  the  transport  value  chains.  Secondly,  the  technological  development  was 
based  on  an  evaluation  survey  and  feedback  gathered  throughout  the  project  workshops 
addressing three key criteria. The key takeaways were feasibility of the technical implementation 
and peer-to-peer data exchange to be 70% and 80% respectively. In terms of willingness to share 
data, participants rated 6.4 out of 10. In addition, the theoretical work utilized existing knowledge 
and  explored  options  for  future  governance  and  assurance  frameworks  within  the  domain  of 
environment-related  data  spaces.  Finally,  the  results  of  this  project  prove  the  need  for  future 
efforts in an industry with colossal effects on the environment such as logistics. 

The  Proof  of  Concept  provided  a  momentum  and  promising  results  to  continue  towards  a  full 
build. Moving forward, a considerable amount of work is required to improve and scale towards 
maturity.  A  few  key  improvements  for  the  future  of  the  SFC  Exchange  Network  are  improving 
semantics,  handling  of  large  datasets  and  designing  a  user  interface.  This  vision  cannot  be 
achieved by a single entity; it requires collective efforts of all stakeholders. Therefore, joint action 
is  both  necessary  and  impactful  in  reducing  GHG  emissions  and  strengthening  resiliency  for 
planet earth and future generations. 

August 2023 

6 

 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

1  Business Value 

The need for companies to improve their understanding on carbon impact continues to be more 
relevant  than  ever.  This  is  coming  at  an  unprecedented  time  of  transparent  and  actionable 
corporate social responsibility targets. The shift towards addressing carbon footprint for products 
and services is contingent upon the availability and the accessibility of data for a sound overview. 
Thus, SFC Exchange Network is a sociotechnical project aimed to demonstrate the strength of 
collaborative efforts to harmonize data sharing on the premises of dataspace principles.  

The collaboration of diverse actors to report better quality data allows consumers to take informed 
action  and  signal  the  shift  towards  decarbonization  with  their  choices.  In  addition,  a 
methodological approach to corporate reporting which relies less on manual input can catalyze 
the  shift  towards  decarbonization  as  complying  with  regulations  from  local  and  international 
governmental agencies are becoming non-negotiable. 

The focus of the PoC phase has been set on large corporate to corporate exchange. Initially, two 
use cases were prioritized; carbon reporting and identification of carbon hotspots. However, due 
to resource limitations from the participants, only the use case of improving accuracy of reporting 
emissions is the focus of the PoC. Improving accuracy of reporting emissions is an important use 
case for all stakeholders working to gain a better overview on their data and inform sustainability-
led  decision-making.  In  today’s  business  world,  the  extent  of  a  company’s  profitability  is 
contingent  upon  the  climate  impact  of  its  operations,  legal  compliance  and  brand  identity 
regarding  carbon  emissions.  Thus,  choosing  this  use-case  is  a  first  step  towards  supporting 
granular logistics emissions reporting. The Proof of Concept was evaluated based on the data 
exchange for the chosen use case which provided the context of the exchange. The evaluation 
of this phase is assessed against three key criteria of:  

•  Willingness to share data 
•  Feasible peer-to-peer data exchange  
•  Feasible technical implementation 

Looking  beyond  the  PoC  phase,  dataspaces  provide  immense  opportunities  to  foster  carbon 
transparency. Currently within the logistics industry, carbon reporting levels are within business-
to-business (B2B) or business-to-consumer (B2C) exchanges. In the future, enabling business-
to-anyone (B2X) reporting is key so that any use case can be addressed through data exchange. 
Therefore, this work is preparatory to achieve the grander vision of B2X reporting for multi-faceted 
objectives towards decarbonization. 

1.1  Project Team 

The project team consisted of Smart Freight Centre as the main project management team as 
well  as  external  support  teams.  The  external  support  teams  contributed  within  their  realm  of 
subject matter thereby providing expertise and valuable inputs to the shaping of the PoC phase. 
The teams consisted of Think-it, British Standards Institution (BSI) and McKinsey Sustainability. 
Think-it  headed  the  IT  development  and  technology  implementation.  McKinsey  Sustainability 
contributed a fact-based analysis towards developing the Business Value Proposition and Full 
Build development assessment. BSI advised on an initial risk-based assurance framework to be 
audited. Additionally, drawing upon the already existing working relations with the Partnership for 
Carbon  Transparency  (PACT)  -  a  consortium  managed  by  WBCSD,  numerous  brainstorming 
exchanges were conducted to share best practices on consortia. Finally, the SINE Foundation 

August 2023 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

has  aided  in  the  data  semantics  segment  and  provided  guidance  on  industry  practices  in 
sovereign data sharing. 

1.2  Project Participants 

Moreover,  this  project  would  not  have  started  and  progressed  further  without  the  unwavering 
contributions  of  the  participants.  The  participants  were  a  combination  of  shippers,  carriers, 
logistics service providers (LSP’s) and tool providers. The PoC participants were composed of 
two  groups,  advisory  and  core  members.  The  advisory  members  have  been  supportive  in  the 
project initiation. Additionally, they provided feedback on key decisions of the project through their 
participation in plenary workshops.  

The core members are participants who have been continuously providing input and feedback 
throughout the project. From the project initiation, starting with the kick-off period, progressing 
thus far in the project to support testing until the end of the PoC. The core members have formed 
PoC value chain groups to test the use case of: Improving accuracy of reporting emissions. The 
value chain participants fulfilled one of the two main roles of: data providers and data consumers. 
Lastly, one tool provider asynchronously supported the work given their resource availability and 
expertise in API development. They exchanged dummy data with a hypothetical data consumer, 
being Think-it.  

August 2023 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

2  Governance 

Governance is a term that defines any interaction in a social setting. It is particularly crucial to be 
defined in a very complex project that comprises of multiple stakeholders. Hence, governance is 
one  of  the  main  pillars  of  SFC  Exchange  Network.  Considering  dataspaces  are  an  open 
ecosystem of data sharing based on adherence to set guidelines, it is of utmost importance to 
determine the governance structure. A governance structure in dataspaces mandates a playbook 
of how participants conduct themselves and interact with one another in a level playing field. This 
is  important  as  dataspaces  are  self-governing  and  complex  in  nature  hence  a  playbook  with 
guidelines on participants’ roles and obligations, legal obedience and conflict resolution scenarios 
must be determined. These guidelines are the dictation of the dataspace as it is set forth, agreed 
upon and monitored by all participants of the dataspace.  

According to Reference Architecture Model v.3 report by (International Data Spaces Association, 
2019), the strength of dataspaces is drawn from the fact that it is an ecosystem which leverages 
the  federation  of  participants  for  the  mutual  benefit  of  all.  As  a  result,  dataspaces  enable 
participants the ability to contribute while maintaining accountability to fulfil secure and trusted 
data  sharing  mechanisms.  In  general,  governance  structures  in  dataspaces  consist  of  two 
components: 

•  Organizational governance 
•  Data governance 

For the scope of the PoC, governance within this section is reflected as organizational governance 
defined  by  Cairney  (2019)  as  the  “range  of  practices  or  conditions  to  ensure  integrity  and 
accountability in a social setting”. Whilst the data governance as emphasized by the International 
Data Spaces Association is crucial as well—this part is embedded in greater details within the 
technology section of this report (see section 3).  

2.1  Organizational Governance 

Organizational  governance  can  take  many  forms  and  shapes  depending  on  the  context  and 
envisioned  aim  of  the  congregation.  SFC  Exchange  Network’s  PoC  phase  aims  to  provide  an 
industry  wide  automated  and  decentralized  exchange  of  logistics  GHG  emissions  thereby 
enabling  a  use  case  to  improve  accuracy  of  reporting  emissions.  Refining  the  accuracy  of 
emissions  allows  for  better  transparency  within  the  logistics  sector  that  is  significant  to 
decarbonize.  In  relation  to  this,  the  organizational  governance  structure  is  to  be  based  on 
environment-related data space principles to drive the work towards decarbonization. According 
to the Governing the Environment-Related Data Space report from the GovLab, three criteria are 
essential in achieving an effective governance structure as seen in below Figure 1 which depicts 
Data Governance Components (Fritzenkötter, et al., n.d.). 

August 2023 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Figure 1: “The 3 Ps of Data Governance” by (Verhulst & Young , 
Governing the Environment-Related Data Space, n.d.) 

The criteria are composed of the “3 Ps”: principles, processes, and practices thereby cumulatively 
making up the purpose (Verhulst, Hudson, & Zacharzewski, Governing the Environment-Related 
Data Space, 2022): 

•  Principles are the core characters to guide and establish activities 
•  Processes are systematic methods in which decision making is taken and implemented 
•  Practices & Tools are the actions and resources needed to bring the structure alive 

The  3  P’s  relate  to  various  aspects  which  are  closely  and  broadly  related  to  overall  Data 
Governance components. This framework by Stefaan G. Verhulst and Andrew Young showcases 
the  complexity  of  governance  and  the  ever-present  multi-layers  (Verhulst,  Hudson,  & 
Zacharzewski, Governing the Environment-Related Data Space, 2022). With the SFC Exchange 
Network being a complex project composed of various stakeholders, it was evident to define the 
organizational  governance  to  ensure  fair  and  robust  structure  that  upholds  responsibility  and 
accountability amongst participants. 

2.2  PoC Governance 

During the PoC phase, SFC oversaw the organizational governance of the project with input from 
the  core  and  advisory  members.  This  decision  was  due  to  two  reasons.  Firstly,  guidance  was 
needed given the short time period and members’ limited conceptual understanding of the project. 
Therefore, having SFC as a centralized decision-making body was efficient to be agile and propel 
the work given the very ambitious timeline. SFC is a neutral entity amongst the actors with the 
intermediary role to act as a guide was a needed approach. Secondly, the PoC is the initiation of 
a decentralized, dataspace effort. Thus, as the grounding work was created, a successful PoC 
delivery with tangible results was needed before exploring any governance structure with higher 
member involvement. 

August 2023 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Figure 2: PoC Governance 

In Figure 2, a depiction of the PoC governance structure is laid out. As seen, the PoC governance 
is  made  up  of  core  and  advisory  participants  who  guide  SFC  through  critical  feedback  and 
engagements.  In  turn,  SFC  “steers”  the  overall  structure  by  incorporating  the  input  from 
participants as well as completing content and project management tasks. This dual role resulted 
in SFC acting both as a working group and a steering committee. Further working groups include 
the external support teams who are instrumental in the project. Since this governance structure 
was undertaken during the PoC, it is temporary. 

2.3 

Intermediate Post-PoC Governance 

In between the PoC phase and the fully scaled solution, is the intermediate post-PoC phase. In 
terms  of  organizational  governance,  the  post-PoC  phase  will  be  marked  by  increasing 
participants, amidst other objectives, who will join SFC Exchange Network to pilot the technology 
further. This is a growth projection that requires SFC to be involved as the project adapts to the 
expanding members and other objectives such as increased use cases. Therefore, SFC will act 
as a secretariat to help with “nurturing” the project towards further maturity. 

August 2023 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Figure 3: Post - PoC Governance 

Figure 3 above displays the immediate post PoC governance structure which is chosen. A few of 
the main “nurturing” tasks include SFC to make decisions on the working groups of the project. 
Such working groups will be organized into two parts, the ecosystem management and technical 
operations. One of the main changes that is expected is the official Steering Committee group 
which will provide overall visibility and support the operations. This group will be composed of the 
various company participants and voted in by a participatory process. SFC as a secretariat joined 
by  the  Steering  Committee  and  working  groups,  the  SFC  Exchange  Network  can  continue  to 
develop in project structure and establish itself further in dataspace efforts.  

2.4  Future Governance 

Since  the  previous  phases  are  considered  provisional,  moving  from  a  temporary  governance 
structure  to  an  established  governance  structure  requires  the  need  to  collect  input  from 
participants and follow guidance from IDSA and other related decentralized dataspace knowledge 
streams.  Although  there  may  be  various  working  definitions  of  governance,  when  it  comes  to 
defining the structure--majority emphasize the importance of collecting input from participants so 
that all opinions are voiced. 

Considering this key aspect of governance, consequently, a hybrid workshop on Governance and 
Assurance was held during the Smart Freight Week in April, 2023. The goal of this workshop was 
to  gauge  understanding  on  governance  as  well  as  discuss  and  collect  input  regarding  future 
governance  options.  During  this  workshop,  SFC  presented  governance  options  based  on 
Governing the Environment-Related Data Space report (Fritzenkötter, et al., n.d.).  

After  a  group  brainstorm  session  and  related  discussions  on  the  governance  options,  the 
participants  voted  for  their  favorite  option  on  the  premise  that  the  SFC  Exchange  Network  is 
moving past the scale-up phase. The options are seen in Figure 4.  

August 2023 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Figure 4: Future Governance Options 

The  voting  results  concluded  the  favorite  option  to  be  Future  option  1:  Emerging  Lead 
Organization. The three options displayed in Figure 4 are based on the work of (Fritzenkötter, et 
al., n.d.). from the GovLab. Discussing and brainstorming on the future governance structure is 
useful to understand what participants think and identify where progress can be made to move 
towards  advanced  and  a  resilient  governance  structure  although  it  is  a  far-fetched  task 
considering there will be many modifications. 

Based on continuous feedback and discussions regarding future governance structure, there are 
a few open-ended questions which can help guide the choice of a governance scheme. At this 
stage, it is difficult to address them but these questions and points will be taken aboard for future 
developments. Some examples include: 

•  How are decisions made in the Network? Is the philosophy of the work reflected in the 

decision making? 

Is there a voting mechanism? If yes, how does it work? 

•  How participatory is the decision making? 
• 
•  How will the Network interact with similar consortia? 
•  How will the governance change when i.e., 1000 members are on board? 

August 2023 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

3  Technology 

The  project  is  built  upon  key  principles  that  prioritize  data  ownership,  security,  control, 
interoperability,  and  adaptability.  By  adhering  to  these  principles,  the  project  fosters  trust, 
enhances data governance, and facilitates valuable insights from shared data. 

•  Data sovereignty: Participants keep ownership rights over their data, ensuring that 

they retain control and autonomy over its use. Data is not stored in any intermediary 
system; it is shared directly from participants' systems to the recipient. 

•  Security: We prioritize the security of the data through encryption, ensuring 

confidentiality even in the event of unauthorized access. 

•  Control: Participants have the ability to revoke access to their data at any time, 

• 

providing them with control over who can view their information. 
Interoperability: Consistent formatting and nomenclature enable seamless integration 
of disparate data sources, enhance data interoperability, and simplify data 
governance. Ensuring that participants can trust the accuracy and reliability of the data 
they interact with, fostering trust and enabling meaningful insights to be derived from 
the data. 

•  Adaptability: The system is designed to be versatile and adaptable, capable of 

accommodating diverse technologies, use cases, and industries. By remaining 
flexible and agnostic to specific technological or industry requirements, we ensure our 
solution can seamlessly integrate into different systems and cater to a wide range of 
use cases. 

3.1  SFC Exchange Network – API 

In  the  project,  an  API  has  been  developed  with  the  objective  of  streamlining  data  sharing, 
enforcing  data  model  compliance,  and  enabling  integration  with  participants'  existing  systems. 
These features empower participants to easily collaborate, maintain data consistency, and adapt 
to  changing  needs  as  the  project  evolves,  following  the  project’s  principles  of  adaptability, 
control, interoperability, and security. 

First,  the  API  simplifies  the  process  of  sharing  data  with  other  participants  by  abstracting  the 
complexities  of  the  Eclipse  Dataspace  Connector  (EDC).  This  streamlined  approach  fosters 
efficient data exchange and enhances collaboration among all participants. 

Furthermore,  the  API  ensures  seamless  data  model  compliance.  It  enforces  the  standardized 
data model across all participants, allowing each participant to align their data with the specified 
model. At this stage, the data model which is used is a subset of the data model published as part 
of the Data Access for Logistics Emissions Project. This eliminates inconsistencies and promotes 
data quality. The uniformity in data structures and formats enhances interoperability, facilitating 
smooth data integration and analysis. 

The API offers flexibility, enabling participants to integrate it into their existing systems, regardless 
of  the  platforms  or  technologies  they  currently  employ.  This  compatibility  ensures  a  smooth 
transition and allows participants to leverage their existing infrastructure. Additionally, the API is 
designed  to  support  automation,  empowering  participants  to  automate  data  management 
processes when needed. This adaptability ensures that participants can optimize their workflows 
and achieve operational efficiencies as the project evolves. 
Tags: Data sovereignty, interoperability, control, security, adaptability 

August 2023 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

3.2  The Eclipse Dataspace Components (EDC) Connector at the heart 

A connector provides a generic way to express, negotiate, and document the rules for sharing 
data, as well as with whom it is shared. These rules are not only in plain text but also machine-
readable and enforceable. To guarantee consistency and interoperability in policy definition, the 
rules or “policies” are formulated using the ODRL (Open Digital Rights Language).  

The Eclipse Dataspace Components (EDC) project, governed by the Eclipse Foundation, offers 
a comprehensive set of open-source components for building data spaces (Eclipse Foundation, 
2022).  Its  main  component,  the  Connector,  enables  secure  and  sovereign  inter-organizational 
data exchange based on the International Data Spaces (IDS) standard. This extensible framework 
supports  multiple  clouds  and  protocols,  including  those  associated  with  the  GAIA-X  project, 
empowering  organizations  to  establish  trusted  data  sharing  environments.  With  decentralized 
design and support for various data transfer protocols, the Eclipse Dataspace Connector ensures 
enterprise-grade scalability and performance for organizations of any size. 

The most important facts about the Eclipse Dataspace Components Connector 

•  The  connector  is completely  FOSS (free  and  open-source  software)  supported  by 

various companies 

•  The 

connector 

(through  Eclipse  Foundation) 

has 

clear 

and accepted 

governance structure and community processes 
•  The connector is more than connecting a database 
•  The  connector  manages data  transfer  and  flow  inclusive  management  of  contract 

and policy management in cloud-native environments 

•  The connector follows a modular system to serve as a facilitator 
•  Running code available on GitHub  

Tags: Data sovereignty, interoperability, control, security, adaptability 

3.3  Testing Process 

The participants were actively engaged in the testing process, which involved the preparation and 
exchange  of  a  set  of  data  within  the  provided  infrastructure.  Pairs  were  derived  based  on  the 
existing contractual relationships participants had to ensure data confidentiality and simulate a 
realistic scenario of data sharing. Carriers acted as data providers sharing information related to 
the activity of the freight and its emissions back to shippers, the data consumers. To ensure a 
realistic testing environment, the pairs were asked to prepare a set of data that closely resembled 
real-world data, although it could be dummy data. 

During the Proof of Concept (PoC), participants were presented with two options: they can either 
have the deployment handled by the Think-it technical team utilizing the infrastructure provided 
by SFC or receive support and deploy the solution themselves. Participants were also presented 
with a range of data source options, providing them with flexibility and catering to their individual 
preferences. They could choose between utilizing data from HTTP sources, S3 buckets, or Azure 
blob storage. This was intended to offer a variety of options that allowed them to select the one 
that aligned best with their specific requirements and existing infrastructure. 

August 2023 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Before testing began, Think-it conducted a workshop which served as an initial introduction to the 
API and a demonstration on how to use it, ensuring that participants gain a clear understanding 
of its capabilities. To facilitate the testing of data exchange, the participants were also provided 
with detailed documentation that serves as a valuable resource, offering support and guidance 
throughout the testing process. 

Considering  the  time  constraints  and  availability  during  the  testing  phase,  all  the  participants 
decided  to  have  the  deployment  handled  by  Think-it  on  SFC’s  infrastructure.  This  technology 
choice in simple terms is the “SME plug-in option” and it can be classified as Software as a Service 
(SaaS).  The  main  benefits  are  that  the  technology  is  configured  and  deployed  easily  for  the 
participants and the software updates can be automatically rolled out. However, choosing such 
an  option  has  its  respective  considerations.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  it  can  be  restrictive  for 
companies in terms of flexibility as there is a separation between this SaaS choice and company’s 
IT infrastructure. 

A second option for companies was also developed which was the “deploy it yourself” choice. All 
participants could use their own cloud infrastructure and deploy the API. This choice allows for a 
higher degree of control. Thus, participants can decide how to shape the API and integrate in 
within  their  IT  systems.  This  option  requires  maintenance  responsibility  and  higher  resource 
commitments from participants. A few benefits are clear with such a choice: each company has 
a  higher  degree  of  flexibility  for  customisation  thus  achieving  higher  interoperability  with  own 
existing environment for internal processes. 

All in all, the project concluded with all participants choosing the SaaS solution using the SFC 
infrastructure deployed on AWS. This was justifiable given the time and resources available for 
the  PoC.  For  future  testing,  corporate  needs  should  be  identified  in  terms  of  carbon  reporting 
obligations  and  IT  procedures.    In  addition,  participants  would  have  to  agree  on  a  set  of 
technological features that the API would have to cater to. This requires prioritisation and ranking 
of the most important criteria to navigate between the two technology choices upon joining the 
SFC Exchange Network. 

3.4  SFC Exchange Network PoC Architecture – Showcasing the exchange 

of data  

The  participants  were  grouped  in  pairs  of  data  providers  and  data  consumers.  These  pairs 
reflected their contractual relationships in real life and guided the data exchange. In the project, 
the data providers were carriers and the consumers were the respective shippers they provide 
services  to.  In  the  data  exchange  process,  there  are  two  main  phases:  "Preparing  the  data 
exchange", details at Figure 5 and " The consumer requests data from a provider " with more 
details at Figure 6. 

In Figure 5, the provider initiates the process by sending a request that includes details about the 
data  they  want  to  share  (1),  such  as  its  location  and  the  intended  recipient.  The  API  then 
communicates with the connector (2), which creates an asset linked to the data source. This asset 
is configured with the appropriate policies to enable secure sharing with the chosen participant. 

August 2023 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Figure 5: Preparing the data exchange 

Once the data is prepared, the data exchange can happen as seen in Figure 6. In this phase, the 
consumer sends a request to the API (1), specifying the data they want to consume. The API then 
communicates with the connector (2) to initiate the exchange process. The consumer's connector 
establishes communication with the provider's connector (3), which retrieves the requested data 
from  the  provider's  data  source.  The  retrieved  data  is  then  passed  back  to  the  API  (4),  which 
finally delivers it to the consumer.  

Figure 6: The consumer requests data from a provider 

August 2023 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

4  Assurance Framework and Approach 

As  part  of  the  Proof  of  Concept,  SFC  has  identified  the  need  to  establish  trust  in  the  SFC 
Exchange Network. To achieve this, an assurance framework needs to be established, embedded 
and  monitored  to  mitigate  risks  relating  to  trust  in  the  data  exchange. Within  the  assurance 
framework,  a  set  of  controls  needs  to  be  iteratively  defined.  The  output  of  this  assurance 
framework  should  ensure  that  controls  are  firstly  identified  and  present  and  secondly  are 
operating as intended.      

This  framework  has  been  structured  into  three  pillars  to  address  the  key  categories  of  risks 
identified:   

Table 1: Overview of the assurance framework 

Pillar 1  

Pillar 2  

Pillar 3  

Description  

Risk  

Focus  

Output  

Member  
Member’s  management 
of emissions data. 

Technology  
The 
and 
software 
hardware  supporting  the 
exchange. 

Data  
Data flow and processing 
within the exchange. 

the 

The controls supporting the pillars (i.e. Risk categories) are not aligned to best 
practice which may result in a loss of trust in the data exchange. 
Are 
members 
business  practices,  data 
management,  accounting 
and  reporting  practices 
carried out appropriately? 

can  we  place 
How 
reliance 
a 
on 
decentralized  technology 
solution? 

Does 
the  data  being 
submitted  by  members 
adhere 
to  predefined 
parameters? 

in 

Can  it  accommodate  the 
variances 
size, 
security,  maturity  and 
the  key 
complexity  of 
stakeholders? 
To define the controls expected to mitigate the risk 
and document these requirements so that they can 
be embedded and monitored. 

Out  of  scope  as  this  is 
part  of  another  work 
stream and it is expected 
these  requirements  will 
be 
by 
members. 

adhered 

to 

An  initial  subset  of  this  assurance  framework  is  described  in  this  section.  The  assurance 
framework is based on internationally recognized frameworks that are widely accepted and used 
internationally. Key terminology to remember:  

Table 2: Key terms 

Term  

Controls  

Assurance 
Framework  

Description  

These  are  the  controls  that  need  to  be  put  in  place  to  make  sure  that  the 
respective process achieves its objectives.  
Establishing  the  process  of  monitoring  these  controls  to  ensure  they  have 
been  embedded  and  are  working  effectively  i.e.  the  assurance  protocol, 
criteria, frequency, roles and responsibilities etc. This should incorporate an 

August 2023 

18 

 
 
 
 
  
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

independent  audit  of  the  assurance  framework  by  an  external  auditor  with 
appropriate competencies. 

4.1  Pillar 1: Member 

Best Practice Identified 
A core foundational requirement of maintaining a high degree of trust in the data exchange is that 
all parties are confident that emissions data submitted into the ecosystem are produced based 
on best practice guidance on emissions management and calculation, and that data represents 
all relevant business activity. The existing GLEC guidelines and ISO 14083 standard provide the 
most relevant best practice foundations at this point, and organizations can opt to be verified or 
certified  against  these  by  qualified  auditors.  Such  verification  and  certification  schemes  will 
eventually form the foundational basis for enabling members to participate in the data exchange, 
with  relevant  information  about  third-party  verification/certification  and  the  status  of  individual 
members being recorded in the SFC Exchange Network.  

Critical Controls 
The purpose of the Member Assurance scheme is to evaluate and verify that member practices 
and organizational controls are in alignment with key guiding principles described in ISO 14083 
of  Completeness,  Consistency,  Accuracy,  Transparency,  and  Conservativeness.  This pillar 
should also define the scope / system boundaries that companies will be exposing within the SFC 
Exchange Network, for example the number of business units including data at any given time, 
or the number/percentage of suppliers participating in sharing data.    

Post-PoC Steps 

In the next post-PoC phase – as a core part of defining the wider member onboarding procedures, 
conformity of members to both the relevant ISO 14083 and SFC CAS schemes as part of these 
procedures will be more deeply considered, with data integrity and quality beyond manual inputs 
being a core requirement of members participating in the Data Exchange. 

4.2  Pillar 2: Technology 

Best Practice Identified 

Providing assurance over a decentralized technology solution requires a tailored approach that is 
both meaningful and practical. The approaches proposed here are grounded in international best 
practice, but have been designed to provide flexibility of choice in specific criteria against which 
the  key  cybersecurity  principles  of  (1)  Confidentiality,  (2)  Integrity  and  (3)  Availability  can  be 
assessed.  

The  use  of  v1.1  of  the  NIST  Cybersecurity  Framework  (CSF)1  or  similar  is  proposed.  The 
Framework  provides  a  common  language  for  understanding,  managing  and  expressing 
cybersecurity and broader technology risk both internally and externally, and can be used to help 
identify and prioritize actions for risk reduction. Selection of NIST CSF for use within this project 
is more advantageous than a specific international cybersecurity or information security standard.  
NIST CSF is a flexible framework under which we can:  

•  Consider the decentralized nature of the data exchange, ensuring that risks are identified 
and assigned to data exchange custodians (e.g. SFC/Think-It) or individual members in 
an appropriate manner. 

• 

Identify controls using NIST’s functions to define an overarching set of assurance criteria 
that  can  be  applied  and  assessed,  while  considering  the  size  and  risk  profile  of  the 
different exchange members. 

August 2023 

19 

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

• 

Identify  controls  at  the  exchange  design  phase,  assign  appropriate  mitigations  to  be 
implemented  throughout  the  development  phase  to  ensure  the  controls  objectives  are 
met,  assign  ownership  and  accountability,  and  track  any  observations  through  to 
operationalization. 

Critical Controls 

NIST  CSF  is  an  activity  or  capability  focused  framework,  which  means  the  basic  activities  or 
capabilities  required  to  manage  information  security  risk,  enable  risk  management  decisions, 
address  threats  and  continuous  improvement,  are  organized  using  a  set  of  5  Functions  – 
namely:   

• 

Identify:  “Develop  the  organizational  understanding  to  manage  cybersecurity  risk  to 
systems,  assets,  data,  and  capabilities.”  The  activities  in  the  Identify  function  are 
foundational for effective use of the Framework. Understanding the business context, the 
resources that support critical functions, and the related cybersecurity risks enables an 
organization to focus and prioritize its efforts, consistent with its risk management strategy 
and business needs.  

•  Protect: “Develop and implement the appropriate safeguards to ensure delivery of critical 
infrastructure services” The Protect Function supports the ability to limit or contain the 
impact of a potential cybersecurity event.  

•  Detect: “Develop and implement the appropriate activities to identify the occurrence of a 
cybersecurity  event”  The  Detect  function  enables  timely  discovery  of  cybersecurity 
events.  

•  Respond: “Develop and implement the appropriate activities to take action regarding a 
detected cybersecurity event” The Respond Function supports the ability to contain the 
impact of a potential cybersecurity event.  

•  Recover:  “Develop  and  implement  the  appropriate  activities  to  maintain  plans  for 
resilience  and  to  restore  any  capabilities  or  services  that  were  impaired  due  to  a 
cybersecurity event.” The Recover function supports timely recovery to normal operations 
to reduce the impact from a cybersecurity event.  

A detailed list of the NIST CSF control categories and subcategories is provided as a separate 
appendix.    

Post-PoC Steps 
A Technology Assurance scheme will be developed during the next phases of this work and then 
incorporated into this Assurance Framework.  

4.3  Pillar 3: Data 

Best Practice Identified 

SFC has a number of separate set of initiatives around developing consistent understanding of 
data  semantics  around  parameters  relevant  to  the  data  exchange  which  support  the  data 
validation goals required here. To support the scale and speed needed by an exchange network 
of this size, key optimal elements of data integrity and assurance should be automated and built 
into checks of data as they are submitted into the system. Therefore, the data validation element 
of  the  assurance  framework  is  designed  as  system-managed  semantic  validation  of  data 
submitted  by  members  (in-line  as  data  is  submitted)  to  ensure  that  specific  data  adheres  to 
predefined parameters - data types, feasible ranges of data, accurate outputs of data calculations, 
etc. A prerequisite of good exchange data validation rules is the activities highlighted in Pillar 1 
above in relation to upstream assurance of member practices.   

August 2023 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Critical Controls 
This pillar focuses on ensuring that data being submitted into the SFC Exchange Network system 
adheres to a number of key principles described in the ISO 14083 standard2 - or put more simply, 
“what good input data to the exchange should be”. These principles, in the context of good data 
validation rules are:  

•  Completeness: Data submissions should include all relevant GHG emissions specific 
data to the allocated business activity. Although this principle will be fully verified via the 
next Member Practices Assurance element of the assurance framework, opportunities to 
implement  completeness  checks  of  member  data  submitted  into  the  system  will  be 
implemented  where  feasible,  to  ensure  that  submitted  data  reflects  all  applicable 
business  activity  and  GHG  emissions  specific  to  appropriately  allocated  business 
activity.   

•  Consistency: Data submissions should enable meaningful comparisons in GHG-related 
information,  ensuring  that  submitted  data  is  only  permissible  within  specific  ranges  or 
based  on  consistent  units.  Any  data  not  adhering  to  required  ranges/units  will  flag  a 
system error and will not be accepted by the SFC system, which supports meaningful 
comparisons across submissions.  

•  Accuracy:  Accuracy  in  business  activity  data  and/or  calculated  GHG  emissions  will 
reduce bias and uncertainties as far as is practical, for primary, modelled or other data 
formats. The data validation element of the Framework supports this principle by ensuring 
that submitted data falls within ranges that reflect typical or feasible business activity and 
greenhouse  gas  emissions,  and  that  data  associated  with  multiple  units  of  business 
activity  produce  accurate  outputs  (e.g.,  GHG  calculations),  where  feasible  and  where 
input/output data are available.   

•  Transparency: This principle aims to ensure that sufficient and appropriate GHG-related 
information  is  disclosed,  allowing  intended  users  to  make  decisions  with  reasonable 
confidence.  In  practice,  this  means  that  the  assumptions  and  methodologies  used  in 
creating  a  data  inventory  should  be  clearly  explained  to  facilitate  replication  and 
assessment  of  the  inventory  by  the  intended  users  of  the  reported  data.  Although  the 
Member pillar of this framework will evaluate methods and assumptions, the Data pillar 
will support this principle by preventing omissions of required information, such as:   

•  Business activity data  
•  Disclosure of use of primary or secondary data  
•  Disclosure of estimations or modeling used to produce calculations    

•  Conservativeness:  This  element  of  the  framework  will  support  the  principle  of 
conservativeness  by  rejecting  data  or  calculations  that  are  disproportionately  small  or 
large,  and  fall  outside  of  the  range  of  feasible  volumes  of  business  activity  and/or 
associated GHG emissions associated with transport activity. 

Post-PoC Steps 
Note  that  initial  data  validation  criteria  have  been  implemented  for  an  initial  set  of  input  data 
parameters  supported  by  the  PoC,  with  an  intent  to  expand  the  data  validation  checks  as  the 
number of supported input data parameters increase. The SFC Exchange Network project team 
will continue to seek member input and technical assistance in the definition and application of 
the expanding validation requirements post-PoC.   

August 2023 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

5  Evaluation 

The goal of the Proof of Concept was to verify the feasibility and value proposition of the SFC 
Exchange  Network,  while  also  identifying  critical  and  sensitive  elements  that  need  to  be 
addressed in future scale-up. 

The evaluation focused on the following key elements to determine the success of the PoC: 

•  Willingness to share data: The primary component of the evaluation process centers 
around  assessing  participants'  willingness  to  share  data  under  the  given  data 
sovereignty,  control,  security,  interoperability,  and  adaptability  principles.  This 
criterion was specifically selected to gauge participants' acceptance and adherence to 
the established data governance framework and robust security principles.  

•  Feasible  peer-to-peer  data  exchange:  The  PoC  aimed  to  demonstrate  the  practical 
implementation of data sharing and exchange functionalities within the proposed project. 
Participants  should  be  able  to  effectively  share  and  exchange  data,  showcasing  the 
system's ability to facilitate seamless data transfer. 

•  Feasible technical implementation given the nature of the project: Data sovereignty 
and  security  are  paramount  in  any  data-sharing  initiative.  The  PoC  evaluated  the 
implementation of robust measures to ensure that each participant maintains control over 
their data and that the data remains secure throughout the sharing process. This includes 
encryption  protocols,  access  controls,  authentication  mechanisms,  and  other  relevant 
security measures that align with the project principles of security, control, and data 
sovereignty. 

5.1  Evaluation Outcomes 

To  assess  the  PoC  results  an  evaluation  survey  was  designed  and  shared  with  all  project 
participants  post  the  testing  phase.  Participants'  feedback  was  gathered  to  assess  the 
effectiveness and viability of the POC in achieving its objectives. The outcomes provided valuable 
insights and drew meaningful conclusions for the future of this initiative. The key takeaways are 
summarized in the tables below. 

•  Willingness to share data: The average willingness of participants to share data under 
given  data  governance  and  security  principles  is  6.4  out  of  10.  This  figure  is  partially 
attributed to the value chain partnership which defined the resource availability spent and 
the efforts put forward in the exchange.   

•  Feasible peer-to-peer data exchange: 80% of the participants were able to exchange 
data  within  their  designated  partner.  This  figure  is  justified  due  to  reasons  such  as 
misalignment  of  value  chain  capacity  and  short  testing  phase.  The  aforementioned 
reasons will be addressed in the future. 

•  Feasible  technical  implementation given  the  nature  of  the  project:  70%  of  the 
participants  believed  that  data  sovereignty  and  security  were  maintained.  Considering 
the  PoC  deployments  were  hosted  on  a  temporary  cloud  infrastructure,  this  figure  is 
reassuring to continue scaling for full integration.   

August 2023 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Table 3: Overall impression and experience 

Overall Impression of the PoC 

Data Exchange 

The average rating for the overall impression of 
the PoC was around 7 to 8, indicating a positive 
and favorable response from most participants 

Most  participants  were  able  to  exchange  data 
with  their  designated  partner,  although  some 
encountered  challenges  with  data  models  and 
parameter acceptance 

Table 4: API documentation and testing 

Experience Testing the 
PoC 

Overall, participants had 
a  positive  experience 
testing  the  POC  with  a 
rating  of  was  7.6  out  of 
favorable 
10, 
with 
the 
comments  about 
documentation 
and 
support provided 

API Documentation 

API Responses 

Participants found the API 
documentation  generally 
easy  to  understand  and 
the 
to 
sufficient 
but 
necessary 
some 
suggested 
improvements  to  provide 
more  detailed  information 
on the API endpoints 

test 
steps, 

participants 
Most 
reported 
consistent 
and  accurate  API 
responses,  but  some 
encountered 
communication 
issues 

Testing 
Difficulties 

Participants 
faced 
challenges  related 
to  access  issues, 
the  data  model, 
and aligning with it 

Table 5: Security and performance 

Security 
Effectiveness 

Measures 

Data 
Security 

Sovereignty 

and 

API 
Responsiveness, 
Reliability 

Performance, 
and 

Participants  found  the  security 
including 
measures, 
access 
authentication 
to  be 
control  mechanisms, 
robust and effective 

and 

for 

although 

most 
Maintained 
participants, 
the 
testing  was  not  extensive. 
requested 
Participants 
transparency  and 
additional 
documentation 
for  GDPR 
compliance 

overall 

The 
performance, 
responsiveness,  and  reliability 
of 
testing 
received  an  average  rating  of 
7.6 out of 10 

the  API  during 

Table 6: PoC Evaluation and Expectations 

Alignment with Expectations 
and Objectives 

While  the  PoC  aligned  with 
participants'  expectations  and 
to  some  extent, 
objectives 
for 
there  were  suggestions 
improvements 
user-
friendliness  and  clarity  on  the 
role of tool providers 

in 

Appealing Aspects 

Data Model Alignment 

were 

Participants 
most 
interested  in  the  technology 
aspect  of  the  PoC,  including 
governance  and  assurance 
considerations, 
the 
validated data model 

and 

The  alignment  of  the  data  model 
with  existing  data  structures 
varied, with ratings ranging from 3 
to  10  out  of  10.  Participants 
mentioned 
work 
required  to  match  the  data  and 
ensure consistency 

significant 

August 2023 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Table 7: Post PoC and Implementation 

Scalability 
Confidence 

Post-PoC 
Cases 

Use 

Enhancem
ents 

Implementation 
Obstacles 

Alignment 
with Goals 

Participants 
expressed 
moderate 
confidence in 
the scalability 
of 
the  PoC 
API to handle 
larger 
volumes 
of 
or 
data 
users,  with 
an  average 
rating  of  5.8 
out of 10 

Participants 
envisioned  various 
use 
and 
cases 
business  scenarios 
the  PoC, 
after 
including optimizing 
networks  for  CO2e 
minimization, 
identifying  carbon 
hotspots, 
monitoring 
corporate 
targets, 
and  sharing  parcel-
level emissions with 
end customers 

Participants 
recommend
ed  mass 
upload 
capabilities, 
improved 
UX, 
additional 
data source 
as 
types 
primary 
enhanceme
nts 

and 

data 
IT 

Potential 
obstacles 
included 
quality, 
infrastructure 
complexity,  and 
of 
compliance 
carriers 
the 
to 
data model 

PoC 
The 
aligned well 
with  most 
organizatio
long-
ns' 
term 
strategies 
and  goals, 
receiving 
an  average 
rating of 8.8 
out of 10 

Likelihood 
of 
Implementa
tion 

a 

Participants 
showed 
positive 
inclination 
towards 
moving 
forward  with 
the 
implementati
on,  with  an 
average 
score  of  8.6 
out of 10 

August 2023 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

6  Conclusion 

Based on the evaluations of insights and feedback from the participants, the PoC has successfully 
demonstrated  the  feasibility  and  potential  of  data  exchange.  As  participants  continue  to 
collaborate and contribute insights, the PoC can evolve into a transformative solution with far-
reaching impacts on the industry's sustainability efforts. 

For starters, participants demonstrated the ability to exchange data with their designated partners, 
showcasing  the  PoC's  ability  to  facilitate  smooth  and  valuable  information  flow.  In  terms  of 
support,  participants  appreciated  the  well-structured  API  documentation  with  comprehensive 
information  on  testing  and  the  process  of  integrating  and  utilizing  the  API.  With  this,  the 
participants  stated  confidence  in  the  API  for  real-world  application  as  the  API  consistently 
delivered  accurate  responses  during  testing.  Finally,  participants  expressed  confidence  in  the 
security measures, authentication, and access control mechanisms, ensuring data sovereignty 
and adherence to governance principles.  

While  there  were  promising  outcomes  in  certain  parts,  areas  of  improvement  will  need  to  be 
identified,  prioritized  and  addressed  moving  forward.  For  example,  participants  encountered 
challenges aligning their existing data structures with the PoC's data model. Standardization and 
data  model  improvements  are  needed  to  ensure  seamless  data  integration.  In  addition, 
participants requested transparent documentation on GDPR compliance, security measures, and 
governance  aspects  to  bolster  trust.  There  was  moderate  confidence  in  scalability,  a 
comprehensive analysis is necessary to assess performance with larger data volumes and user 
loads. Lastly, participants stated the need for better user experience and front-end design, aiming 
to strengthen user adoption and engagement.  

Given the aforementioned points and key takeaways from the PoC justified by the participants’ 
evaluation and complemented by the value proposition of the project, pursuit of further work is 
needed to accelerate transparency in the logistics industry and fast-track decarbonization.  

August 2023 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

7  Recommendations 

Based on the valuable experience and feedback from the PoC, these recommendations 
address both new insights and aspects that were previously known but left out of the scope in 
the initial iteration.  

Table 8: Recommendations 

Technical  Challenges  and 
Opportunities 

User 
Interface 

Experience 

and 

Technical 
Participants 

Support 

for 

Scalability and Performance: Evaluate and enhance the system's 
scalability to accommodate a larger user base effectively, along with 
increasing  the  capacity  to  handle  larger  volumes  of  data,  higher 
frequency of data sharing, or the number of use cases supported. 
The  scalability  of  the  system  is  crucial  to  ensure  its  seamless 
operation and optimal performance. 

Advanced  Data  Integrity  Layer:  Add  value  restrictions,  handling 
units of measure, and implement validations when retrieving data to 
maintain data integrity and consistency across the platform. 

More  Support  for  Authentication  Methods  and  Data  Sources: 
Expand  the  range  of  authentication  methods  and  data  sources  to 
accommodate diverse user needs and preferences. 

Logging and Monitoring: Implement comprehensive logging and 
monitoring mechanisms to ensure system stability and security and 
provide insights about performance. 

Despite being initially considered a lower priority in the PoC phase, 
it is now evident that focusing on UX development and creating a 
user-friendly  interface  is  crucial.  A  well-designed  interface  will 
encourage  wider  adoption  and  active  engagement  among  both 
business and technical teams, making it essential for the project's 
success moving forward. 

Ensure  seamless  project  adoption  by  offering  tailored  technical 
support catering to different levels of technical expertise/needs from 
the participants. Providing accessible documentation, establishing a 
trusted 
responsive  support 
technical  partners,  helping  participants  understand  the  existing 
ecosystem  of  applications  and  software,  etc.  Enhancing  technical 
support  empowers  participants,  fostering  collaboration  and  project 
success. 

team,  offering  guidance 

through 

Data  Governance 
Compliance 

and 

Strengthen  alignment  with  SFC  and  participants  to  facilitate  the 
rollout  of  PACT-compliant  features  and  better  adherence  to 
established standards and requirements. Continuously assess and 
refine  the  data  governance  and  security  principles  to  align  with 
evolving  regulations  and  industry  best  practices.  Additionally, 
address feedback related to the data model, consider technical ways 
to  standardize  formats  and  ensure  consistent  labeling  of  fields  to 
match the data model. 

Consider 
Company Profiles 

Different 

Considering the wide range of participating companies and different 
profiles,  it  is  key  to  understand  their  unique  ways  of  using  the 

August 2023 

26 

 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

Agile 
Development 

& 

User-Centric 

Collaboration  in  a  Diverse 
Participant  Landscape  and 
Clear Expectations 

Creating 
Onboarding Experience 

an 

Engaging 

Effective  Communication 
and 
Transparent 
Documentation 

Envisioned 
Business Use Cases 

Valuable 

platform  and  their  distinct  requirements  is  essential  for  successful 
project implementation. 

Adopt  an  agile  approach  for  continuous  improvement,  iterating 
based  on  real  scenarios  feedback,  and  embracing  user-centric 
insights.  Engage  participants  to  better  understand  their  needs, 
identify pain points, and incorporate these valuable insights into the 
system's design. By fostering a collaborative platform for knowledge 
sharing,  we  ensure  collective  growth,  success,  and  seamless 
communication. 

Acknowledging  the  varying  levels  of  maturity  and  capacity  among 
participants  to  follow  standards,  fit  project  requirements,  and 
collaborate in terms of insights, testing, and support is crucial. As the 
project  progresses  and  more  participants  join,  establishing  clear 
roles  and  responsibilities  alongside  a  robust  communication  and 
these 
collaboration  model  becomes  essential.  Adapting 
differences and defining clear expectations and commitments based 
on each participant's context and availability will play a pivotal role 
in ensuring the scalability and success of the project. 

to 

Developing  a  robust  onboarding  experience  holds  significant 
importance  in  successfully  integrating  new  participants  into  the 
project. It involves providing comprehensive resources that enable 
individuals  to  become  acquainted  with  the  project's  objectives, 
values,  and  key  aspects  from  both  business  and  technical 
perspectives.  A  well-designed  onboarding  experience  not  only 
facilitates the newcomers' integration but also plays a pivotal role in 
fostering  knowledge  sharing,  collaboration,  and  overall  project 
success. 

forward 

One  key  aspect  moving 
is  coordination,  clear 
documentation,  and  transparent  communication  among  diverse 
participants.  Regular  updates,  documented  decisions,  and  shared 
guidelines build trust and understanding. Providing easy access to 
essential information through a centralized platform, collaboration & 
trust are fostered. 

Participants  various  use  cases  and  business  scenarios  that  could 
add value to their organizations. These include optimizing networks 
for  CO2e  minimization,  identifying  carbon  hotspots,  monitoring 
corporate  targets,  and  sharing  parcel-level  emissions  with  end 
customers, underscoring the PoC's potential for significant business 
impact. 

August 2023 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report 
Smart Freight Centre 

8  Bibliography 

Cairney,  P.  (2019).  Understanding  Public  Policy:  Theories  and  Issues  (2nd  ed.).  Bloomsbury 

Publishing. 

Fritzenkötter,  J.,  Hohoff,  L.,  Pierri,  P.,  Verhulst,  S.  G.,  Young,  A.,  &  Zacharzewski,  A.  (n.d.). 

GOVERNING THE ENVIRONMENT-RELATED DATA SPACE. TheGovLab. 

International Data Spaces Association. (2019). REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE MODEL. Berlin: 

International Data Spaces Association. 

Verhulst, S. G., & Young , A. (n.d.). Governing the Environment-Related Data Space. Retrieved 
from  TheGovLab:  https://blog.thegovlab.org/post/governing-the-environment-related-
data-space 

Verhulst, S. G., Hudson, C., & Zacharzewski, A. (2022, October 04). Governing the Environment-
TheGovLab: 

Related 
https://blog.thegovlab.org/post/governing-the-environment-related-data-space 

Retrieved 

Space. 

Data 

from 

Eclipse  Foundation.  (2022,  July).  Eclipse  Dataspace  Components 

.  Retrieved 

from 

https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.edc 

The React Framework for the Web. (n.d.). Retrieved from NEXT.js: https://nextjs.org/ 
Koa next generation web framework for node.js. (n.d.). Retrieved from Koa: https://koajs.com/ 

Redis. (n.d.). Retrieved from Redis: https://redis.io/ 
Automate  infrastructure  on  any  cloud  with  Terraform.  (n.d.).  Retrieved  from  Terraform: 

https://www.terraform.io/ 

Production-Grade  Container  Orchestration. 

(n.d.).  Retrieved 

from  Kubernetes: 

https://kubernetes.io/ 

Dynamic  Attribute  Provisioning  Service 

(DAPS). 

(n.d.).  Retrieved 

from  Github: 

https://github.com/International-Data-Spaces-Association/IDS-
G/blob/main/Components/IdentityProvider/DAPS/README.md 

Identity  Provider. 

(n.d.).  Retrieved 

from  Fraunhofer 

International  Data  Spaces: 

https://www.dataspaces.fraunhofer.de/en/software/identity_provider.html 
from  Open  Source 

Identity  and  Access  Management: 

Keycloak. 

(n.d.).  Retrieved 
https://www.keycloak.org/ 

NIST.  (2023,  March  13).  Framework  Documents.  Retrieved  from  Cybersecurity  framework: 

https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/framework 

August 2023 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

9  Appendix 

9.1  Technology choices 

9.1.1  SFC Exchange Network – API Tech Stack 

The SFC Exchange Network API is built upon a robust and secure tech stack that ensures the 
reliability, scalability, and protection of data exchanged between participants. By selecting these 
technologies  for  the  project's  tech  stack,  we  ensure  that  the  implementation  adheres  to  the 
principles of data ownership, security, control, interoperability, and adaptability. 

Frontend 
Next.js  is  a  powerful  web  development  framework  that  offers  a  range  of  benefits  (The  React 
Framework  for  the  Web,  n.d.).  With  its  automatic  server-side  rendering,  Next.js  enhances  the 
performance and load time of web pages. The inclusion of built-in routing eliminates the need for 
a separate routing library, resulting in a simplified code base. Additionally, Next.js enables static 
site generation, creating static versions of pages for improved performance and reduced server 
costs. Furthermore, Next.js boasts a thriving ecosystem of plugins and libraries, facilitating the 
discovery of solutions to common challenges and the seamless integration of new features into 
applications. 
Tags: interoperability, control, security, adaptability 

Backend 
KOA was selected as the backend framework due to its efficiency and modern web development 
practices,  aligning  mainly  with  the  project's  principles  of  adaptability  and  security  (Koa  next 
generation web framework for node.js, n.d.). Its streamlined code structure and modular design 
enable faster development and easy addition/removal of functionality. KOA also provides robust 
error handling, ensuring a reliable user experience. It provides tools like Helmet middleware to 
protect against common web vulnerabilities and measures such as CSRF protection and JWT 
authentication  can  be  implemented  to  enhance  security  further.  Overall,  By  utilizing  KOA,  we 
ensure a secure and efficient backend that aligns with the project's principles and ensures high 
performance and reliability. 
Tags: interoperability, control, security, adaptability 

Redis Cache is an in-memory data structure store that provides multiple functionalities, including 
high-performance cache, database storage, and message broker (Redis, n.d.). It leverages its in-
memory storage mechanism to enable fast access to data, significantly improving data retrieval 
speed.  In  the  project,  it  plays  a  crucial  role  in  managing  tokens  required  for  data  retrieval. 
Furthermore, Redis Cache offers robust security features that align with the project's security 
principle  and  ensures  the  confidentiality  and  integrity  of  the  cached  data.  By  leveraging  the 
capabilities  of  Redis  Cache,  we  optimize  data  storage  and  retrieval,  enhance  system 
performance, and prioritize the security and integrity of the cached data. 
Tags: security 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

Infrastructure 
Infrastructure as code: Terraform was chosen as the infrastructure management tool due to its 
ability to define infrastructure in a code-based format, ensuring consistent reproducibility across 
different  environments  (Automate  infrastructure  on  any  cloud  with  Terraform,  n.d.).  With 
Terraform,  changes  to  the  infrastructure  configurations  can  be  tracked  and  managed,  and 
changes can be easily rolled back when necessary. Collaboration is also made more effective 
using  version  control  tools.  Additionally,  Terraform's  cloud-agnostic  nature  allows  you  to  write 
infrastructure  code  for  multiple  cloud  providers,  providing  the  flexibility  to  adapt  to  different 
environments and take advantage of various cloud offerings. By utilizing Terraform, we adhere to 
the project's adaptability principle, allowing consistent infrastructure deployment and easy 
scalability. 
Tags: adaptability 

Orchestration:  Kubernetes  has  been  selected  as  the  orchestration  tool  because  it  allows  to 
effortlessly  scale  the  application  to  accommodate  increased  traffic  and  workload 
(Production-Grade Container Orchestration, n.d.). With its platform-agnostic nature, Kubernetes 
allows to deploy and manage our application across various cloud providers, on-premises setups, 
or  hybrid  environments,  providing  greater  flexibility  for  the  participants,  aligning  with  the 
adaptability principle. 

Tags: adaptability 

Security  
Encryption:  Ensuring  the  security  of  the  project  is  a  paramount  concern.  Robust  encryption 
measures  are  implemented  to  safeguard  data  both  at  rest  and  in  transit.  AWS  S3  and  other 
supported  data  sources  offer  built-in  encryption  features,  with  the  option  to  define  custom 
encryption keys if necessary. Similarly, encryption for databases connected to our instances is 
enforced. For secure data transmission, HTTPS encryption over SSL/TLS protocols is employed. 
These encryption practices provide a strong layer of protection for sensitive information, ensuring 
the project maintains a secure environment for all users, aligning with the security principle. 

Tags: security 

Network:  Network  security  is  another  crucial  aspect  for  the  project.  Encryption  is  used  to 
safeguard  all  network  traffic,  both  between  the  application  and  users  and  among  different 
components within the application. By encrypting the communication channels, we ensure that 
sensitive  data  remains  secure  and  inaccessible  to  unauthorized  parties.  Additionally,  secure 
network  architectures  like  demilitarized  zones  (DMZ)  are  applied  to  create  a  clear  separation 
between internal and external networks, minimizing the risk of unauthorized access. To further 
fortify the network, firewalls are implemented to actively monitor network traffic and block potential 
threats, providing an additional layer of protection against malicious activities. These measures 
collectively contribute to maintaining a secure network environment, safeguarding the project from 
potential security risks, and aligning with the security principle. 

Tags: security 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

Authentication  -  Connector  to  Connector:  DAPS  (Data  Authorization  and  Provisioning 
Service)  serves  as  an  attribute  server.  It  issues  OAuth2  access  tokens  to  International  Data 
Spaces connectors, enabling them to access services and data from other connectors securely 
(Identity  Provider,  n.d.).  The  DAPS  server  implements  JWT  bearer  client  authentication  for 
OAuth2,  allowing  connectors  to  authenticate  themselves  using  their  certificates  (Dynamic 
Attribute Provisioning Service (DAPS), n.d.). In return, they receive an access token that grants 
them authorized access to other connectors within the network. This mechanism ensures secure 
authentication and facilitates seamless communication between connectors thus aligning with the 
project's security principle. 
Tags: security 

Authentication  -  Application:  Keycloak  is  an  open-source  identity  and  access  management 
solution that offers a comprehensive set of features for authentication (Keycloak, n.d.). It provides 
a  centralized  platform  for  managing  user  identities,  securing  applications,  and  enforcing  fine-
grained access control policies. It offers customizable authentication flows, allowing organizations 
to adapt the authentication process according to their specific requirements. Overall, it aligns with 
the security, control and adaptability principles. 
Tags: security, control & adaptability 

9.1.2  Limitations 
During the Proof of Concept phase, certain requirements and features were intentionally excluded 
from  implementation.  This  deliberate  decision  aimed  to  achieve  a  more  efficient  and  timely 
delivery of a functional solution, while gaining a thorough understanding of the diverse business 
requirements and participant needs. By focusing on a simplified approach, valuable insights were 
gathered to inform the development of more complex features in future phases. This strategic 
approach minimized the risk of rework and reduced the need for significant adjustments to the 
initial implementation. These limitations and out-of-scope features should be considered in the 
context of the short-term nature of the PoC. They can be addressed and expanded upon as the 
foundation  has  been  set  for  the  project  to  accommodate  these  new  features  in  the  upcoming 
phases. 

•  Time & resource constraints: This is a main key factor and to optimize efficiency and 

meet the project's objectives within the ambitious time available & diverse 
responsibilities to fulfill, the team had to make strategic decisions regarding resource 
allocation and project scope. The primary focus was on delivering a functional solution 
within the defined timeframe, which required adopting a streamlined approach with a 
strong emphasis on essential functionalities. By focusing on a simplified & agile 
approach, the objective was to gather valuable insights to inform the value of the 
project, as well as what would be the best strategy to move it forward as well as identify 
the needs & requirements to consider for future phases. It also enabled the team to 
effectively allocate their efforts to understand and develop the solution, create 
comprehensive documentation, and support materials, actively participate in 
workshops, communicate & support participants, etc. 

•  Use cases: From the very beginning of the project it became evident that attempting to 
address a vast array of use cases was not feasible. Consequently, the goal shifted from 
an initial proposed set of use cases to demonstrate the effectiveness of the data 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

exchange solution, which possesses the versatility to accommodate various use cases. 
This deliberate choice allowed the technical team to gain familiarity with the specific 
business requirements used on the PoC and the participants to do just the necessary 
adjustments for this stage of the project and align with other use cases in the future. 

•  Technology: The project posed significant technical challenges in integrating various 
complex components within the PoC timeframe. The EDC, the PACT framework, and 
the diversity of systems from potential participants, all brought their distinct 
requirements, making it challenging to create a cohesive solution that could effectively 
bring them together in the amount of time available. As already stated on previously 
mentioned factors, this reinforced the decision on the primary goal being the delivery of 
a functional and operational initial version of the data exchange solution, also from a 
technical perspective. This approach prioritizes the successful implementation of a 
working solution, avoiding the risk of non-delivery in time, or developing a solution that 
would not adequately meet the requirements of a broad range of participants, limiting 
the options to test and provide valuable input which will inform the development of 
enhanced functionalities in future phases. 

9.1.3  Out of Scope Reflection 
It is important to acknowledge that certain items are currently considered out of scope during the 
Proof of Concept phase due to timeline constraints. However, it should be noted that these items 
are not limited to future feature phases but encompass key features of the overall project. While 
they may not be addressed immediately, they hold significant importance and will be carefully 
considered in subsequent stages of development. 

•  Support for batch requests, allowing users to share multiple shipments simultaneously 

for improved efficiency 

•  Support all the nine different use cases currently identifies 
•  Handling large volumes of data 
•  All features are fully PACT compliant 
•  Deployment on participant’s systems 
•  Advanced data integrity layer: add values restrictions, handle units of measure, add 

validations when retrieving data, etc. 

•  Offer more support for authentication methods and data sources 
•  A user interface to facilitate interaction with the API 
•  Logging and monitoring 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

9.2  Assurance Framework and Approach – NIST details 

Some details on the NIST framework (NIST, 2023) can be found in the table below. 

Function 

Category 

Subcategory 

Informative References 

IDENTIFY 
(ID) 

Asset Management 
(ID.AM): The data, 
personnel, devices, 
systems, and facilities 
that enable the 
organization to achieve 
business purposes are 
identified and managed 
consistent with their 
relative importance to 
organizational 
objectives and the 
organization’s risk 
strategy. 

ID.AM-1: Physical 
devices and systems 
within the organization 
are inventoried 

·       CIS CSC 1 

·       COBIT 5 BAI09.01, BAI09.02 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3.4 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 7.8 

ID.AM-2: Software 
platforms and 
applications within the 
organization are 
inventoried 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.1.1, A.8.1.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CM-8, PM-5 

·       CIS CSC 2 

·       COBIT 5 BAI09.01, BAI09.02, BAI09.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3.4 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 7.8 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.1.1, A.8.1.2, A.12.5.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CM-8, PM-5 

ID.AM-3: Organizational 
communication and data 
flows are mapped 

·       CIS CSC 12 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.02 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3.4 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.13.2.1, A.13.2.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-4, CA-3, CA-9, PL-8 

ID.AM-4: External 
information systems are 
catalogued 

·       CIS CSC 12 

·       COBIT 5 APO02.02, APO10.04, DSS01.02 

ID.AM-5: Resources 
(e.g., hardware, devices, 
data, time, personnel, 
and software) are 
prioritized based on 
their classification, 
criticality, and business 
value  

ID.AM-6: Cybersecurity 
roles and responsibilities 
for the entire workforce 
and third-party 
stakeholders (e.g., 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.11.2.6 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-20, SA-9 

·       CIS CSC 13, 14 

·       COBIT 5 APO03.03, APO03.04, APO12.01, BAI04.02, 
BAI09.02 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3.6 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.2.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, RA-2, SA-14, SC-6 

·       CIS CSC 17, 19 

·       COBIT 5 APO01.02, APO07.06, APO13.01, DSS06.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.3.3  

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.1 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

Business Environment 
(ID.BE): The 
organization’s mission, 
objectives, 
stakeholders, and 
activities are 
understood and 
prioritized; this 
information is used to 
inform cybersecurity 
roles, responsibilities, 
and risk management 
decisions. 

Governance (ID.GV): 
The policies, 
procedures, and 
processes to manage 
and monitor the 
organization’s 
regulatory, legal, risk, 
environmental, and 
operational 
requirements are 
understood and inform 
the management of 
cybersecurity risk. 

suppliers, customers, 
partners) are established 

ID.BE-1: The 
organization’s role in the 
supply chain is identified 
and communicated 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, PS-7, PM-11 

·       COBIT 5 APO08.01, APO08.04, APO08.05, 
APO10.03, APO10.04, APO10.05 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.15.1.1, A.15.1.2, A.15.1.3, 
A.15.2.1, A.15.2.2 

ID.BE-2: The 
organization’s place in 
critical infrastructure 
and its industry sector is 
identified and 
communicated 

ID.BE-3: Priorities for 
organizational mission, 
objectives, and activities 
are established and 
communicated 

ID.BE-4: Dependencies 
and critical functions for 
delivery of critical 
services are established 

ID.BE-5: Resilience 
requirements to support 
delivery of critical 
services are established 
for all operating states 
(e.g. under 
duress/attack, during 
recovery, normal 
operations) 

ID.GV-1: Organizational 
cybersecurity policy is 
established and 
communicated 

ID.GV-2: Cybersecurity 
roles and responsibilities 
are coordinated and 
aligned with internal 
roles and external 
partners 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, SA-12 

·       COBIT 5 APO02.06, APO03.01 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Clause 4.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PM-8 

·       COBIT 5 APO02.01, APO02.06, APO03.01 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.2.1, 4.2.3.6 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PM-11, SA-14 

·       COBIT 5 APO10.01, BAI04.02, BAI09.02 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.11.2.2, A.11.2.3, A.12.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-8, PE-9, PE-11, PM-8, SA-
14 

·       COBIT 5 BAI03.02, DSS04.02 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.11.1.4, A.17.1.1, A.17.1.2, 
A.17.2.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, CP-11, SA-13, SA-14 

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 APO01.03, APO13.01, EDM01.01, 
EDM01.02 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.6 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.5.1.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 -1 controls from all security 
control families  

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 APO01.02, APO10.03, APO13.02, DSS05.04 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.3.3 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.1, A.7.2.1, A.15.1.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PS-7, PM-1, PM-2 

·       CIS CSC 19 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

Risk Assessment 
(ID.RA): The 
organization 
understands the 
cybersecurity risk to 
organizational 
operations (including 
mission, functions, 
image, or reputation), 
organizational assets, 
and individuals. 

ID.GV-3: Legal and 
regulatory requirements 
regarding cybersecurity, 
including privacy and 
civil liberties obligations, 
are understood and 
managed 

·       COBIT 5 BAI02.01, MEA03.01, MEA03.04 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.4.3.7 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.18.1.1, A.18.1.2, A.18.1.3, 
A.18.1.4, A.18.1.5 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 -1 controls from all security 
control families 

ID.GV-4: Governance 
and risk management 
processes address 
cybersecurity risks 

·       COBIT 5 EDM03.02, APO12.02, APO12.05, 
DSS04.02 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3.1, 4.2.3.3, 4.2.3.8, 
4.2.3.9, 4.2.3.11, 4.3.2.4.3, 4.3.2.6.3 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Clause 6 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SA-2, PM-3, PM-7, PM-9, 
PM-10, PM-11 

ID.RA-1: Asset 
vulnerabilities are 
identified and 
documented 

·       CIS CSC 4 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.01, APO12.02, APO12.03, 
APO12.04, DSS05.01, DSS05.02 

ID.RA-2: Cyber threat 
intelligence is received 
from information 
sharing forums and 
sources 

ID.RA-3: Threats, both 
internal and external, 
are identified and 
documented 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3, 4.2.3.7, 4.2.3.9, 4.2.3.12 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.6.1, A.18.2.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CA-2, CA-7, CA-8, RA-3, RA-
5, SA-5, SA-11, SI-2, SI-4, SI-5 

·       CIS CSC 4 

·       COBIT 5 BAI08.01 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3, 4.2.3.9, 4.2.3.12 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SI-5, PM-15, PM-16 

·       CIS CSC 4 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.01, APO12.02, APO12.03, 
APO12.04 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3, 4.2.3.9, 4.2.3.12 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Clause 6.1.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 RA-3, SI-5, PM-12, PM-16 

ID.RA-4: Potential 
business impacts and 
likelihoods are identified 

·       CIS CSC 4 

·       COBIT 5 DSS04.02 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3, 4.2.3.9, 4.2.3.12 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.6, Clause 6.1.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 RA-2, RA-3, SA-14, PM-9, 
PM-11 

·       CIS CSC 4 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

ID.RA-5: Threats, 
vulnerabilities, 
likelihoods, and impacts 
are used to determine 
risk 

ID.RA-6: Risk responses 
are identified and 
prioritized 

ID.RM-1: Risk 
management processes 
are established, 
managed, and agreed to 
by organizational 
stakeholders 

ID.RM-2: Organizational 
risk tolerance is 
determined and clearly 
expressed 

ID.RM-3: The 
organization’s 
determination of risk 
tolerance is informed by 
its role in critical 
infrastructure and sector 
specific risk analysis 

ID.SC-1: Cyber supply 
chain risk management 
processes are identified, 
established, assessed, 
managed, and agreed to 
by organizational 
stakeholders 

ID.SC-2: Suppliers and 
third party partners of 
information systems, 
components, and 
services are identified, 
prioritized, and assessed 
using a cyber supply 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.02 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.6.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 RA-2, RA-3, PM-16 

·       CIS CSC 4 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.05, APO13.02 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Clause 6.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PM-4, PM-9 

·       CIS CSC 4 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.04, APO12.05, APO13.02, BAI02.03, 
BAI04.02  

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Clause 6.1.3, Clause 8.3, 
Clause 9.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PM-9 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.6.5 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Clause 6.1.3, Clause 8.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PM-9 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.02 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Clause 6.1.3, Clause 8.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SA-14, PM-8, PM-9, PM-11 

·       CIS CSC 4 

·       COBIT 5 APO10.01, APO10.04, APO12.04, 
APO12.05, APO13.02, BAI01.03, BAI02.03, BAI04.02 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.15.1.1, A.15.1.2, A.15.1.3, 
A.15.2.1, A.15.2.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SA-9, SA-12, PM-9 

·       COBIT 5 APO10.01, APO10.02, APO10.04, 
APO10.05, APO12.01, APO12.02, APO12.03, APO12.04, 
APO12.05, APO12.06, APO13.02, BAI02.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3.1, 4.2.3.2, 4.2.3.3, 
4.2.3.4, 4.2.3.6, 4.2.3.8, 4.2.3.9, 4.2.3.10, 4.2.3.12, 
4.2.3.13, 4.2.3.14 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.15.2.1, A.15.2.2 

Risk Management 
Strategy (ID.RM): The 
organization’s priorities, 
constraints, risk 
tolerances, and 
assumptions are 
established and used to 
support operational risk 
decisions. 

Supply Chain Risk 
Management (ID.SC): 
The organization’s 
priorities, constraints, 
risk tolerances, and 
assumptions are 
established and used to 
support risk decisions 
associated with 
managing supply chain 
risk. The organization 
has established and 
implemented the 
processes to identify, 
assess and manage 
supply chain risks. 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

chain risk assessment 
process  

ID.SC-3: Contracts with 
suppliers and third-party 
partners are used to 
implement appropriate 
measures designed to 
meet the objectives of 
an organization’s 
cybersecurity program 
and Cyber Supply Chain 
Risk Management Plan. 

ID.SC-4: Suppliers and 
third-party partners are 
routinely assessed using 
audits, test results, or 
other forms of 
evaluations to confirm 
they are meeting their 
contractual obligations. 

ID.SC-5: Response and 
recovery planning and 
testing are conducted 
with suppliers and third-
party providers 

PR.AC-1: Identities and 
credentials are issued, 
managed, verified, 
revoked, and audited for 
authorized devices, 
users and processes 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 RA-2, RA-3, SA-12, SA-14, 
SA-15, PM-9 

·       COBIT 5 APO10.01, APO10.02, APO10.03, 
APO10.04, APO10.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.6.4, 4.3.2.6.7 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.15.1.1, A.15.1.2, A.15.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SA-9, SA-11, SA-12, PM-9 

·       COBIT 5 APO10.01, APO10.03, APO10.04, 
APO10.05, MEA01.01, MEA01.02, MEA01.03, 
MEA01.04, MEA01.05  

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.6.7 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 6.1 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.15.2.1, A.15.2.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AU-2, AU-6, AU-12, AU-16, 
PS-7, SA-9, SA-12 

·       CIS CSC 19, 20 

·       COBIT 5 DSS04.04 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.5.7, 4.3.4.5.11  

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 2.8, SR 3.3, SR.6.1, SR 7.3, 
SR 7.4 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.17.1.3  

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, CP-4, IR-3, IR-4, IR-6, 
IR-8, IR-9 

·       CIS CSC 1, 5, 15, 16 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.04, DSS06.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.5.1 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 1.1, SR 1.2, SR 1.3, SR 1.4, 
SR 1.5, SR 1.7, SR 1.8, SR 1.9 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.9.2.1, A.9.2.2, A.9.2.3, 
A.9.2.4, A.9.2.6, A.9.3.1, A.9.4.2, A.9.4.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-1, AC-2, IA-1, IA-2, IA-3, 
IA-4, IA-5, IA-6, IA-7, IA-8, IA-9, IA-10, IA-11  

PR.AC-2: Physical access 
to assets is managed and 
protected 

·       COBIT 5 DSS01.04, DSS05.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.3.2, 4.3.3.3.8 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.11.1.1, A.11.1.2, A.11.1.3, 
A.11.1.4, A.11.1.5, A.11.1.6, A.11.2.1, A.11.2.3, 
A.11.2.5, A.11.2.6, A.11.2.7, A.11.2.8 

PROTECT 
(PR) 

Identity Management, 
Authentication and 
Access Control (PR.AC): 
Access to physical and 
logical assets and 
associated facilities is 
limited to authorized 
users, processes, and 
devices, and is managed 
consistent with the 
assessed risk of 
unauthorized access to 
authorized activities and 
transactions. 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

PR.AC-3: Remote access 
is managed 

PR.AC-4: Access 
permissions and 
authorizations are 
managed, incorporating 
the principles of least 
privilege and separation 
of duties 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PE-2, PE-3, PE-4, PE-5, PE-6, 
PE-8 

·       CIS CSC 12 

·       COBIT 5 APO13.01, DSS01.04, DSS05.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.6.6 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 1.13, SR 2.6 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.2.1, A.6.2.2, A.11.2.6, 
A.13.1.1, A.13.2.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-1, AC-17, AC-19, AC-20, 
SC-15 

·       CIS CSC 3, 5, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18  

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.04 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.7.3 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 2.1 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.2, A.9.1.2, A.9.2.3, 
A.9.4.1, A.9.4.4, A.9.4.5 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-1, AC-2, AC-3, AC-5, AC-
6, AC-14, AC-16, AC-24 

PR.AC-5: Network 
integrity is protected 
(e.g., network 
segregation, network 
segmentation) 

·       CIS CSC 9, 14, 15, 18 

·       COBIT 5 DSS01.05, DSS05.02 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.4 

PR.AC-6: Identities are 
proofed and bound to 
credentials and asserted 
in interactions 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 3.1, SR 3.8 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.13.1.1, A.13.1.3, A.13.2.1, 
A.14.1.2, A.14.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-4, AC-10, SC-7 

·       CIS CSC, 16 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.04, DSS05.05, DSS05.07, DSS06.03  

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.2.2, 4.3.3.5.2, 4.3.3.7.2, 
4.3.3.7.4 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 1.1, SR 1.2, SR 1.4, SR 1.5, 
SR 1.9, SR 2.1  

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013, A.7.1.1, A.9.2.1  

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-1, AC-2, AC-3,  AC-16, AC-
19, AC-24, IA-1, IA-2, IA-4, IA-5, IA-8, PE-2, PS-3 

PR.AC-7: Users, devices, 
and other assets are 
authenticated (e.g., 
single-factor, multi-
factor) commensurate 
with the risk of the 

·       CIS CSC 1, 12, 15, 16 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.04, DSS05.10, DSS06.10 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.6.1, 4.3.3.6.2, 4.3.3.6.3, 
4.3.3.6.4, 4.3.3.6.5, 4.3.3.6.6, 4.3.3.6.7, 4.3.3.6.8, 
4.3.3.6.9 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

Awareness and Training 
(PR.AT): The 
organization’s personnel 
and partners are 
provided cybersecurity 
awareness education 
and are trained to 
perform their 
cybersecurity-related 
duties and 
responsibilities 
consistent with related 
policies, procedures, 
and agreements. 

transaction (e.g., 
individuals’ security and 
privacy risks and other 
organizational risks) 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 1.1, SR 1.2, SR 1.5, SR 1.7, 
SR 1.8, SR 1.9, SR 1.10  

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.9.2.1, A.9.2.4, A.9.3.1, 
A.9.4.2, A.9.4.3, A.18.1.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-7, AC-8, AC-9, AC-11, AC-
12, AC-14, IA-1, IA-2, IA-3, IA-4, IA-5, IA-8, IA-9, IA-10, 
IA-11 

PR.AT-1: All users are 
informed and trained  

·       CIS CSC 17, 18 

·       COBIT 5 APO07.03, BAI05.07 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.4.2 

PR.AT-2: Privileged users 
understand their roles 
and responsibilities  

PR.AT-3: Third-party 
stakeholders (e.g., 
suppliers, customers, 
partners) understand 
their roles and 
responsibilities  

PR.AT-4: Senior 
executives understand 
their roles and 
responsibilities  

PR.AT-5: Physical and 
cybersecurity personnel 
understand their roles 
and responsibilities  

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.7.2.2, A.12.2.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AT-2, PM-13 

·       CIS CSC 5, 17, 18  

·       COBIT 5 APO07.02, DSS05.04, DSS06.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.4.2, 4.3.2.4.3 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.1, A.7.2.2  

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AT-3, PM-13 

·       CIS CSC 17 

·       COBIT 5 APO07.03, APO07.06, APO10.04, 
APO10.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.4.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.1, A.7.2.1, A.7.2.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PS-7, SA-9, SA-16 

·       CIS CSC 17, 19 

·       COBIT 5 EDM01.01, APO01.02, APO07.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.4.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.1, A.7.2.2  

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AT-3, PM-13 

·       CIS CSC 17 

·       COBIT 5 APO07.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.4.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.1, A.7.2.2  

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AT-3, IR-2, PM-13 

·       CIS CSC 13, 14 

·       COBIT 5 APO01.06, BAI02.01, BAI06.01, DSS04.07, 
DSS05.03, DSS06.06 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 3.4, SR 4.1 

Data Security (PR.DS): 
Information and records 
(data) are managed 
consistent with the 
organization’s risk 

PR.DS-1: Data-at-rest is 
protected 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

strategy to protect the 
confidentiality, integrity, 
and availability of 
information. 

PR.DS-2: Data-in-transit 
is protected 

PR.DS-3: Assets are 
formally managed 
throughout removal, 
transfers, and 
disposition 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.2.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 MP-8, SC-12, SC-28 

·       CIS CSC 13, 14 

·       COBIT 5 APO01.06, DSS05.02, DSS06.06 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 3.1, SR 3.8, SR 4.1, SR 4.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.2.3, A.13.1.1, A.13.2.1, 
A.13.2.3, A.14.1.2, A.14.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SC-8, SC-11, SC-12 

·       CIS CSC 1 

·       COBIT 5 BAI09.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.3.9, 4.3.4.4.1 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 4.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.2.3, A.8.3.1, A.8.3.2, 
A.8.3.3, A.11.2.5, A.11.2.7 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CM-8, MP-6, PE-16 

PR.DS-4: Adequate 
capacity to ensure 
availability is maintained 

·       CIS CSC 1, 2, 13 

·       COBIT 5 APO13.01, BAI04.04 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 7.1, SR 7.2 

PR.DS-5: Protections 
against data leaks are 
implemented 

PR.DS-6: Integrity 
checking mechanisms 
are used to verify 
software, firmware, and 
information integrity 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.1.3, A.17.2.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AU-4, CP-2, SC-5 

·       CIS CSC 13 

·       COBIT 5 APO01.06, DSS05.04, DSS05.07, DSS06.02 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 5.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.2, A.7.1.1, A.7.1.2, 
A.7.3.1, A.8.2.2, A.8.2.3, A.9.1.1, A.9.1.2, A.9.2.3, 
A.9.4.1, A.9.4.4, A.9.4.5, A.10.1.1, A.11.1.4, A.11.1.5, 
A.11.2.1, A.13.1.1, A.13.1.3, A.13.2.1, A.13.2.3, 
A.13.2.4, A.14.1.2, A.14.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-4, AC-5, AC-6, PE-19, PS-
3, PS-6, SC-7, SC-8, SC-13, SC-31, SI-4 

·       CIS CSC 2, 3 

·       COBIT 5 APO01.06, BAI06.01, DSS06.02 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 3.1, SR 3.3, SR 3.4, SR 3.8 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.2.1, A.12.5.1, A.14.1.2, 
A.14.1.3, A.14.2.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SC-16, SI-7 

PR.DS-7: The 
development and testing 

·       CIS CSC 18, 20 

·       COBIT 5 BAI03.08, BAI07.04 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

environment(s) are 
separate from the 
production environment 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.1.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CM-2 

PR.DS-8: Integrity 
checking mechanisms 
are used to verify 
hardware integrity 

·       COBIT 5 BAI03.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.4.4 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.11.2.4 

Information Protection 
Processes and 
Procedures (PR.IP): 
Security policies (that 
address purpose, scope, 
roles, responsibilities, 
management 
commitment, and 
coordination among 
organizational entities), 
processes, and 
procedures are 
maintained and used to 
manage protection of 
information systems 
and assets. 

PR.IP-1: A baseline 
configuration of 
information 
technology/industrial 
control systems is 
created and maintained 
incorporating security 
principles (e.g. concept 
of least functionality) 

PR.IP-2: A System 
Development Life Cycle 
to manage systems is 
implemented 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SA-10, SI-7 

·       CIS CSC 3, 9, 11 

·       COBIT 5 BAI10.01, BAI10.02, BAI10.03, BAI10.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.3.2, 4.3.4.3.3 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 7.6 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.1.2, A.12.5.1, A.12.6.2, 
A.14.2.2, A.14.2.3, A.14.2.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CM-2, CM-3, CM-4, CM-5, 
CM-6, CM-7, CM-9, SA-10 

·       CIS CSC 18 

·       COBIT 5 APO13.01, BAI03.01, BAI03.02, BAI03.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.3.3 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.5, A.14.1.1, A.14.2.1, 
A.14.2.5 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PL-8, SA-3, SA-4, SA-8, SA-
10, SA-11, SA-12, SA-15, SA-17, SI-12, SI-13, SI-14, SI-16, 
SI-17  

PR.IP-3: Configuration 
change control 
processes are in place 

·       CIS CSC 3, 11 

·       COBIT 5 BAI01.06, BAI06.01 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.3.2, 4.3.4.3.3 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 7.6 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.1.2, A.12.5.1, A.12.6.2, 
A.14.2.2, A.14.2.3, A.14.2.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CM-3, CM-4, SA-10 

PR.IP-4: Backups of 
information are 
conducted, maintained, 
and tested  

·       CIS CSC 10 

·       COBIT 5 APO13.01, DSS01.01, DSS04.07  

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.3.9 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 7.3, SR 7.4 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.3.1, A.17.1.2, A.17.1.3, 
A.18.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-4, CP-6, CP-9 

·       COBIT 5 DSS01.04, DSS05.05 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

PR.IP-5: Policy and 
regulations regarding 
the physical operating 
environment for 
organizational assets are 
met 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.3.1 4.3.3.3.2, 4.3.3.3.3, 
4.3.3.3.5, 4.3.3.3.6 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.11.1.4, A.11.2.1, A.11.2.2, 
A.11.2.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PE-10, PE-12, PE-13, PE-14, 
PE-15, PE-18 

PR.IP-6: Data is 
destroyed according to 
policy 

·       COBIT 5 BAI09.03, DSS05.06 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.4.4 

PR.IP-7: Protection 
processes are improved 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 4.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.2.3, A.8.3.1, A.8.3.2, 
A.11.2.7 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 MP-6 

·       COBIT 5 APO11.06, APO12.06, DSS04.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.4.3.1, 4.4.3.2, 4.4.3.3, 
4.4.3.4, 4.4.3.5, 4.4.3.6, 4.4.3.7, 4.4.3.8 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.6, Clause 9, Clause 10 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CA-2, CA-7, CP-2, IR-8, PL-2, 
PM-6 

PR.IP-8: Effectiveness of 
protection technologies 
is shared  

·       COBIT 5 BAI08.04, DSS03.04 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.6  

PR.IP-9: Response plans 
(Incident Response and 
Business Continuity) and 
recovery plans (Incident 
Recovery and Disaster 
Recovery) are in place 
and managed 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-21, CA-7, SI-4 

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06, DSS04.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.5.3, 4.3.4.5.1  

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.1, A.17.1.1, A.17.1.2, 
A.17.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, CP-7, CP-12, CP-13, IR-
7, IR-8, IR-9, PE-17 

PR.IP-10: Response and 
recovery plans are 
tested 

·       CIS CSC 19, 20 

·       COBIT 5 DSS04.04 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.5.7, 4.3.4.5.11 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 3.3 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.17.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-4, IR-3, PM-14 

·       CIS CSC 5, 16 

·       COBIT 5 APO07.01, APO07.02, APO07.03, 
APO07.04, APO07.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.2.1, 4.3.3.2.2, 4.3.3.2.3 

PR.IP-11: Cybersecurity 
is included in human 
resources practices (e.g., 
deprovisioning, 
personnel screening) 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

PR.IP-12: A vulnerability 
management plan is 
developed and 
implemented 

PR.MA-1: Maintenance 
and repair of 
organizational assets are 
performed and logged, 
with approved and 
controlled tools 

PR.MA-2: Remote 
maintenance of 
organizational assets is 
approved, logged, and 
performed in a manner 
that prevents 
unauthorized access 

PR.PT-1: Audit/log 
records are determined, 
documented, 
implemented, and 
reviewed in accordance 
with policy 

Maintenance (PR.MA): 
Maintenance and 
repairs of industrial 
control and information 
system components are 
performed consistent 
with policies and 
procedures. 

Protective Technology 
(PR.PT): Technical 
security solutions are 
managed to ensure the 
security and resilience 
of systems and assets, 
consistent with related 
policies, procedures, 
and agreements. 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.7.1.1, A.7.1.2, A.7.2.1, 
A.7.2.2, A.7.2.3, A.7.3.1, A.8.1.4  

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 PS-1, PS-2, PS-3, PS-4, PS-5, 
PS-6, PS-7, PS-8, SA-21  

·       CIS CSC 4, 18, 20 

·       COBIT 5 BAI03.10, DSS05.01, DSS05.02 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.6.1, A.14.2.3, A.16.1.3, 
A.18.2.2, A.18.2.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 RA-3, RA-5, SI-2 

·       COBIT 5 BAI03.10, BAI09.02, BAI09.03, DSS01.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.3.7 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.11.1.2, A.11.2.4, A.11.2.5, 
A.11.2.6 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 MA-2, MA-3, MA-5, MA-6 

·       CIS CSC 3, 5 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.04 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.6.5, 4.3.3.6.6, 4.3.3.6.7, 
4.3.3.6.8 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.11.2.4, A.15.1.1, A.15.2.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 MA-4 

·       CIS CSC 1, 3, 5, 6, 14, 15, 16 

·       COBIT 5 APO11.04, BAI03.05, DSS05.04, DSS05.07, 
MEA02.01 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.3.9, 4.3.3.5.8, 4.3.4.4.7, 
4.4.2.1, 4.4.2.2, 4.4.2.4 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 2.8, SR 2.9, SR 2.10, SR 2.11, 
SR 2.12 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.4.1, A.12.4.2, A.12.4.3, 
A.12.4.4, A.12.7.1  

PR.PT-2: Removable 
media is protected and 
its use restricted 
according to policy 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AU Family 

·       CIS CSC 8, 13 

·       COBIT 5 APO13.01, DSS05.02, DSS05.06  

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 2.3 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.8.2.1, A.8.2.2, A.8.2.3, 
A.8.3.1, A.8.3.3, A.11.2.9 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 MP-2, MP-3, MP-4, MP-5, 
MP-7, MP-8 

PR.PT-3: The principle of 
least functionality is 

·       CIS CSC 3, 11, 14 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.02, DSS05.05, DSS06.06 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

incorporated by 
configuring systems to 
provide only essential 
capabilities 

PR.PT-4: 
Communications and 
control networks are 
protected 

PR.PT-5: Mechanisms 
(e.g., failsafe, load 
balancing, hot swap) are 
implemented to achieve 
resilience requirements 
in normal and adverse 
situations 

DETECT 
(DE) 

Anomalies and Events 
(DE.AE): Anomalous 
activity is detected and 
the potential impact of 
events is understood. 

DE.AE-1: A baseline of 
network operations and 
expected data flows for 
users and systems is 
established and 
managed 

DE.AE-2: Detected 
events are analyzed to 
understand attack 
targets and methods 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.5.1, 4.3.3.5.2, 4.3.3.5.3, 
4.3.3.5.4, 4.3.3.5.5, 4.3.3.5.6, 4.3.3.5.7, 4.3.3.5.8, 
4.3.3.6.1, 4.3.3.6.2, 4.3.3.6.3, 4.3.3.6.4, 4.3.3.6.5, 
4.3.3.6.6, 4.3.3.6.7, 4.3.3.6.8, 4.3.3.6.9, 4.3.3.7.1, 
4.3.3.7.2, 4.3.3.7.3, 4.3.3.7.4 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 1.1, SR 1.2, SR 1.3, SR 1.4, 
SR 1.5, SR 1.6, SR 1.7, SR 1.8, SR 1.9, SR 1.10, SR 1.11, 
SR 1.12, SR 1.13, SR 2.1, SR 2.2, SR 2.3, SR 2.4, SR 2.5, 
SR 2.6, SR 2.7 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.9.1.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-3, CM-7 

·       CIS CSC 8, 12, 15 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.02, APO13.01 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 3.1, SR 3.5, SR 3.8, SR 4.1, 
SR 4.3, SR 5.1, SR 5.2, SR 5.3, SR 7.1, SR 7.6 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.13.1.1, A.13.2.1, A.14.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-4, AC-17, AC-18, CP-8, 
SC-7, SC-19, SC-20, SC-21, SC-22, SC-23, SC-24, SC-25, 
SC-29, SC-32, SC-36, SC-37, SC-38, SC-39, SC-40, SC-41, 
SC-43 

·       COBIT 5 BAI04.01, BAI04.02, BAI04.03, BAI04.04, 
BAI04.05, DSS01.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.2.5.2 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 7.1, SR 7.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.17.1.2, A.17.2.1   

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-7, CP-8, CP-11, CP-13, PL-
8, SA-14, SC-6 

·       CIS CSC 1, 4, 6, 12, 13, 15, 16 

·       COBIT 5 DSS03.01 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.4.3.3 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.1.1, A.12.1.2, A.13.1.1, 
A.13.1.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-4, CA-3, CM-2, SI-4 

·       CIS CSC 3, 6, 13, 15 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.07 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.6, 4.3.4.5.7, 4.3.4.5.8 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 2.8, SR 2.9, SR 2.10, SR 2.11, 
SR 2.12, SR 3.9, SR 6.1, SR 6.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.4.1, A.16.1.1, A.16.1.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AU-6, CA-7, IR-4, SI-4 

·       CIS CSC 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

Security Continuous 
Monitoring (DE.CM): 
The information system 
and assets are 
monitored to identify 
cybersecurity events 
and verify the 
effectiveness of 
protective measures. 

DE.AE-3: Event data are 
collected and correlated 
from multiple sources 
and sensors 

·       COBIT 5 BAI08.02 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 6.1 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.4.1, A.16.1.7 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AU-6, CA-7, IR-4, IR-5, IR-8, 
SI-4 

DE.AE-4: Impact of 
events is determined 

·       CIS CSC 4, 6 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06, DSS03.01 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, IR-4, RA-3, SI-4 

DE.AE-5: Incident alert 
thresholds are 
established 

·       CIS CSC 6, 19 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06, DSS03.01 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3.10 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.4 

DE.CM-1: The network is 
monitored to detect 
potential cybersecurity 
events 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 IR-4, IR-5, IR-8 

·       CIS CSC 1, 7, 8, 12, 13, 15, 16 

·       COBIT 5 DSS01.03, DSS03.05, DSS05.07 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 6.2 

DE.CM-2: The physical 
environment is 
monitored to detect 
potential cybersecurity 
events 

DE.CM-3: Personnel 
activity is monitored to 
detect potential 
cybersecurity events 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-2, AU-12, CA-7, CM-3, 
SC-5, SC-7, SI-4 

·       COBIT 5 DSS01.04, DSS01.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.3.3.8 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.11.1.1, A.11.1.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CA-7, PE-3, PE-6, PE-20 

·       CIS CSC 5, 7, 14, 16 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.07 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 6.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.4.1, A.12.4.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-2, AU-12, AU-13, CA-7, 
CM-10, CM-11 

DE.CM-4: Malicious code 
is detected 

·       CIS CSC 4, 7, 8, 12 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.01 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.3.8 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 3.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.2.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SI-3, SI-8 

·       CIS CSC 7, 8 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

DE.CM-5: Unauthorized 
mobile code is detected 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.01 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 2.4 

DE.CM-6: External 
service provider activity 
is monitored to detect 
potential cybersecurity 
events 

DE.CM-7: Monitoring for 
unauthorized personnel, 
connections, devices, 
and software is 
performed 

DE.CM-8: Vulnerability 
scans are performed 

Detection Processes 
(DE.DP): Detection 
processes and 
procedures are 
maintained and tested 
to ensure awareness of 
anomalous events. 

DE.DP-1: Roles and 
responsibilities for 
detection are well 
defined to ensure 
accountability 

DE.DP-2: Detection 
activities comply with all 
applicable requirements 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.5.1, A.12.6.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SC-18, SI-4, SC-44 

·       COBIT 5 APO07.06, APO10.05 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.14.2.7, A.15.2.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CA-7, PS-7, SA-4, SA-9, SI-4 

·       CIS CSC 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 12, 13, 15, 16 

·       COBIT 5 DSS05.02, DSS05.05 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.4.1, A.14.2.7, A.15.2.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AU-12, CA-7, CM-3, CM-8, 
PE-3, PE-6, PE-20, SI-4 

·       CIS CSC 4, 20 

·       COBIT 5 BAI03.10, DSS05.01 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.2.3.1, 4.2.3.7 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.6.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 RA-5 

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 APO01.02, DSS05.01, DSS06.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.4.3.1 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.1, A.7.2.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CA-2, CA-7, PM-14 

·       COBIT 5 DSS06.01, MEA03.03, MEA03.04 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.4.3.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.18.1.4, A.18.2.2, A.18.2.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AC-25, CA-2, CA-7, SA-18, SI-
4, PM-14 

DE.DP-3: Detection 
processes are tested 

·       COBIT 5 APO13.02, DSS05.02 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.4.3.2 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 3.3 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.14.2.8 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CA-2, CA-7, PE-3, SI-3, SI-4, 
PM-14 

DE.DP-4: Event 
detection information is 
communicated 

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 APO08.04, APO12.06, DSS02.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.9 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

DE.DP-5: Detection 
processes are 
continuously improved 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 6.1 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.2, A.16.1.3 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AU-6, CA-2, CA-7,  RA-5, SI-4 

·       COBIT 5 APO11.06, APO12.06, DSS04.05 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.4.3.4 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.6 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4, CA-2, CA-7, PL-2, RA-5, SI-4, 
PM-14 

RESPOND 
(RS) 

Response Planning 
(RS.RP): Response 
processes and 
procedures are 
executed and 
maintained, to ensure 
response to detected 
cybersecurity incidents. 

Communications 
(RS.CO): Response 
activities are 
coordinated with 
internal and external 
stakeholders (e.g. 
external support from 
law enforcement 
agencies). 

RS.RP-1: Response plan 
is executed during or 
after an incident 

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06, BAI01.10 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.1 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.5 

RS.CO-1: Personnel 
know their roles and 
order of operations 
when a response is 
needed 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, CP-10, IR-4, IR-8  

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 EDM03.02, APO01.02, APO12.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.2, 4.3.4.5.3, 4.3.4.5.4 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.1, A.7.2.2, A.16.1.1  

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, CP-3, IR-3, IR-8 

RS.CO-2: Incidents are 
reported consistent with 
established criteria 

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 DSS01.03 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.5  

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.3, A.16.1.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AU-6, IR-6, IR-8 

RS.CO-3: Information is 
shared consistent with 
response plans 

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 DSS03.04 

RS.CO-4: Coordination 
with stakeholders occurs 
consistent with response 
plans 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.2 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.2, Clause 7.4, Clause 
16.1.2 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CA-2, CA-7, CP-2, IR-4, IR-8, 
PE-6, RA-5, SI-4  

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 DSS03.04 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.5 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Clause 7.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, IR-4, IR-8 

·       CIS CSC 19 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

RS.CO-5: Voluntary 
information sharing 
occurs with external 
stakeholders to achieve 
broader cybersecurity 
situational awareness  

RS.AN-1: Notifications 
from detection systems 
are investigated  

Analysis (RS.AN): 
Analysis is conducted to 
ensure effective 
response and support 
recovery activities. 

·       COBIT 5 BAI08.04 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SI-5, PM-15 

·       CIS CSC 4, 6, 8, 19 

·       COBIT 5 DSS02.04, DSS02.07 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.6, 4.3.4.5.7, 4.3.4.5.8 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 6.1 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.4.1, A.12.4.3, A.16.1.5 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AU-6, CA-7, IR-4, IR-5, PE-6, 
SI-4  

RS.AN-2: The impact of 
the incident is 
understood 

·       COBIT 5 DSS02.02 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.6, 4.3.4.5.7, 4.3.4.5.8 

RS.AN-3: Forensics are 
performed 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.4, A.16.1.6 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, IR-4 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06, DSS03.02, DSS05.07 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 2.8, SR 2.9, SR 2.10, SR 2.11, 
SR 2.12, SR 3.9, SR 6.1 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.7  

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 AU-7, IR-4 

RS.AN-4: Incidents are 
categorized consistent 
with response plans 

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 DSS02.02 

RS.AN-5: Processes are 
established to receive, 
analyze and respond to 
vulnerabilities disclosed 
to the organization from 
internal and external 
sources (e.g. internal 
testing, security 
bulletins, or security 
researchers) 

RS.MI-1: Incidents are 
contained 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.6 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.4  

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, IR-4, IR-5, IR-8 

·       CIS CSC 4, 19 

·       COBIT 5 EDM03.02, DSS05.07 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 SI-5, PM-15 

·       CIS CSC 19 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.6 

·       ISA 62443-3-3:2013 SR 5.1, SR 5.2, SR 5.4 

Mitigation (RS.MI): 
Activities are performed 
to prevent expansion of 
an event, mitigate its 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

effects, and resolve the 
incident. 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.2.1, A.16.1.5 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 IR-4 

RS.MI-2: Incidents are 
mitigated 

·       CIS CSC 4, 19 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06 

RS.MI-3: Newly 
identified vulnerabilities 
are mitigated or 
documented as accepted 
risks 

RS.IM-1: Response plans 
incorporate lessons 
learned 

RS.IM-2: Response 
strategies are updated 

RC.RP-1: Recovery plan 
is executed during or 
after a cybersecurity 
incident  

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.6, 4.3.4.5.10 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.2.1, A.16.1.5 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 IR-4 

·       CIS CSC 4 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.12.6.1 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CA-7, RA-3, RA-5 

·       COBIT 5 BAI01.13 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.3.4.5.10, 4.4.3.4 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.6, Clause 10 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, IR-4, IR-8 

·       COBIT 5 BAI01.13, DSS04.08 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.6, Clause 10 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, IR-4, IR-8 

·       CIS CSC 10 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06, DSS02.05, DSS03.04 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.5 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-10, IR-4, IR-8 

RC.IM-1: Recovery plans 
incorporate lessons 
learned 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06, BAI05.07, DSS04.08 

·       ISA 62443-2-1:2009 4.4.3.4 

RC.IM-2: Recovery 
strategies are updated 

RC.CO-1: Public relations 
are managed 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.6, Clause 10 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, IR-4, IR-8 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06, BAI07.08 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.16.1.6, Clause 10 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, IR-4, IR-8 

·       COBIT 5 EDM03.02 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 A.6.1.4, Clause 7.4 

RC.CO-2: Reputation is 
repaired after an 
incident  

·       COBIT 5 MEA03.02 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Clause 7.4 

Improvements (RS.IM): 
Organizational response 
activities are improved 
by incorporating lessons 
learned from current 
and previous 
detection/response 
activities. 

Recovery Planning 
(RC.RP): Recovery 
processes and 
procedures are 
executed and 
maintained to ensure 
restoration of systems 
or assets affected by 
cybersecurity incidents. 

Improvements (RC.IM): 
Recovery planning and 
processes are improved 
by incorporating lessons 
learned into future 
activities. 

Communications 
(RC.CO): Restoration 
activities are 
coordinated with 
internal and external 
parties (e.g.  

RECOVER 
(RC) 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

coordinating centers, 
Internet Service 
Providers, owners of 
attacking systems, 
victims, other CSIRTs, 
and vendors). 

RC.CO-3: Recovery 
activities are 
communicated to 
internal and external 
stakeholders as well as 
executive and 
management teams 

·       COBIT 5 APO12.06 

·       ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Clause 7.4 

·       NIST SP 800-53 Rev. 4 CP-2, IR-4  

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFC Exchange Network - Proof of Concept Evaluation Report  
Smart Freight Centre 

Join our journey towards 
efficient and zero-emission 
global freight and logistics 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
