Shared Charging for e-Trucks  

Concept Note 

Shared Charging for e-Trucks 

First Steps Towards a Third Way of Charging  

August 2024  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shared Charging for e-Trucks  

Concept Note 

Shared Charging for e-Trucks 

First Steps Towards a Third Way of Charging  

Date: August 2024  

© Smart Freight Centre, 2024 

Suggested citation: Smart Freight Centre. Shared Charging for e-Trucks. 2024 

This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in any form for educational or non-profit purposes 
without special permission from the copyright holder, provided acknowledgment of the source is made. 
Smart Freight Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of any publication that uses 'Shared Charging for e-
Trucks.’ as a source. No use of this publication may be made for resale or for any other commercial purpose 
whatsoever, without prior permission in writing from Smart Freight Centre. 

Disclaimer 

The views expressed in this publication are those of Smart Freight Centre and staff, and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the Board of Trustees of Smart Freight Centre. Smart Freight Centre does not guarantee 
the accuracy of the data included in this publication and does not accept responsibility for consequence of 
their use. 

Acknowledgements 

This report was written by Samuel Barendregt (Smart Freight Centre). 

About Smart Freight Centre 

Smart Freight Centre is an international non-profit organization focused on reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions from freight transportation. Smart Freight Centre’s vision is an efficient and zero emission global 
logistics sector. Smart Freight Centre’s mission is to collaborate with the organization’s global partners to 
quantify impacts, identify solutions, and propagate logistics decarbonization strategies. Smart Freight 
Centre’s goal is to guide the global logistics industry in tracking and reducing the industry’s greenhouse gas 
emissions by one billion tonnes by 2030 and to reach zero emissions by 2050 or earlier, consistent with a 
1.5°C future. 

Contact 

Smart Freight Centre  

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM, Amsterdam, Netherlands 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405 

www.smartfreightcentre.org 

info@smartfreightcentre.org 

2 

 
 
 
 
Shared Charging for e-Trucks  

Concept Note 

Do we need another way to charge?  
Due to the outsized proportion of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions generated by internal combustion 
engines, long distance battery electric trucks (BETs) offer the potential to significantly decrease the 
logistics sector’s emissions. However, BET technology is in the early market stage, and key elements 
including  the  provision  of  charging  infrastructure  are  shrouded  in  uncertainty.  Currently,  the 
predominant assumption maintains that BETs will charge at either private or public facilities. However, 
this concept note will seek to outline challenges to this strategy and forefront shared charging as a 
third way forward.  

Private charging is built exclusively for a company’s (contracted) fleet and enables charging either at 
the  depot  or  destination.  This  “behind  the  fence”  infrastructure  is  off-limits  to  other  electric  fleets. 
Private charging is  common as it requires relatively simple  coordination and provides an important 
level of control to the owner. However, as demand for electricity grid capacity continues to outpace 
grid upgrades, it is increasingly unlikely that private charging alone will meet the charging capacity 
required by BETs. Additional concerns such as low utilization and high up-front investments contribute 
to uncertainty around private charging as the main path forward.  

Public charging is regarded as the solution for enabling long-haul electric truck routes, and for those 
who do not have access to private infrastructure. Public charging offers benefits to fleet owners, such 
as  unlocking  long-haul  routes  and  no  up-front  infrastructure  investments.  However,  as  the  BET 
transition is heavily dependent on favorable total cost of ownership calculations, reliance on public 
charging  infrastructure  entails  a  cost  per  kilowatt  hour  which  has  yet  to  fall  within  a  range  widely 
deemed as acceptable.1 Due in large part to these calculations, public charging cannot be relied upon 
as a fleet’s sole charging strategy.  

Shared  charging,  where  multiple  companies  come  together  to  share  capital  and  operational 
expenditures, has been well received in its introduction. Identified as a “middle-ground” between public 
and  private  charging,  shared  charging  seeks  to  address  drawbacks  of  the  two  more  common 
strategies. Ideally located in logistics hotspots, such as a business park or other high-traffic locations, 
shared  charging  may  be  the  key  to  enabling  faster  fleet  electrification.  Shared  charging  allows 
companies to provide volume guarantees to the site operators to secure high utilization rates, resulting 
in lower pricing than public charging locations.  

The  recently  announced  National  Zero-Emission  Freight  Corridor  Strategy  from  the  United  States 
Departments of Energy and Transportation prioritizes infrastructure deployment to accelerate zero-
emission medium and heavy-duty vehicles. The National Strategy is to first electrify hubs, then connect 
these hubs and finally expand a complete network of zero-emission (ZE) corridors across the country. 
Shared charging offers a cost optimal path towards the electrification of these hubs. Regardless of 
geographical  location,  this  hub-to-corridor-to-network  approach  will  serve  as  the  blueprint  for  the 
battery electric truck uptake. 

There is a need to investigate more fully this third way to charge, as the  apparent benefits directly 
address many of the hurdles in the path towards BET adoption. The following information contained 
here reflects the most recent conversations within the Fleet Electrification Coalition’s shared charging 
working group and reflects input designed to create the conditions for a successful rollout of shared 
charging locations. 

1 In determining the range of acceptable energy pricing for (shared) charging, fleet owners will need to find a balanced charging 
strategy to reach an acceptable ‘average cost of energy’ within wider TCO calculations. 

3 

 
 
 
Shared Charging for e-Trucks  

Concept Note 

Zeroing in on Shared Charging  
The  Fleet  Electrification  Coalition,  in  late  2023,  put  together  a  proposal  for  its  members  to  join  a 
working group aimed at conceptual solution development. As a result, a diverse range of stakeholders 
from fifteen organizations engaged to produce definitions and requirements to enable the success of 
such a solution. The following is a reflection of these conversations.  

To unlock the following benefits of shared charging, the coordinating organization must first conduct a 
basic usage mapping exercise where they can analyze usage patterns of  participating companies. 
Usage  mapping  includes  research  into  anticipated  charging  requirements,  times  needed,  volumes 
expected and more. With a successfully organized plan, the following components add greater value. 

The  three  main  criteria,  those  which  differentiate  shared  charging  from  other  solutions,  include 
utilization, flexibility, and abatement of grid constraints.  

Utilization – the key aspect of facilitating a positive return on investment for charging infrastructure is 
that  it  is  fully  used.  On  the  other  hand,  the  chargers  must  be  available  when  needed,  which  adds 
complexity to the equation.  

Flexibility - in shared charging, flexibility provides participants with the ability to right-size charging 
infrastructure  in  keeping  up  with  fleet  growth,  enables  efficient  use  of  land  and  energy,  and  uses 
collected data to further improve utilization and management. 

Grid  Constraints  -  refers  to  the  delays  associated  with  grid  upgrade  requests  and  availability  of 
electricity. Grid constraints are, of course, prevalent with all  types of charging but shared charging 
collaboration  is  expected  to  reduce  this  impact  by  decreasing  the  number  of  competing  upgrade 
requests from neighboring companies. 

In the table below, these three criteria are placed in discussion with charging strategies to illustrate 
how shared charging relates to public and private charging and fulfills stakeholder requirements.   

4 

 
 
 
Shared Charging for e-Trucks  

Concept Note 

Table 1. Summary of Charging Strategies and Working Group Criteria 

In  comparison  to  public  and  private  charging,  shared  charging  is  a  concept  which  provides  a  cost 
optimal, less resource intensive, relatively quicker deployment strategy for the satisfaction of charging 
infrastructure needs. Shared charging offers additional benefit in areas of high grid congestion.  

The Role of Innovation  
In the working group, a focus on innovation was evident. As BET adoption will require new ways of 
doing  business,  shared  charging  must  anticipate  and  accommodate  these  new  requirements.  The 
results of our discussions on innovation are shared in the following section.  

Digitalization  must  be  embedded  in  the  entire  shared  charging  process  to  enable  smart  charging 
capabilities. The first application is in assignment and reservation of charging bays. Secondly, digital 
management  tools  should  extend  to  fleet  owners/operators  to  schedule  charging  remotely  and  in 
advance as well as pay for the electricity their vehicles use and to monitor charge levels. Digitalization 
can also monitor energy grid aspects to charge when there is a greener energy mix available or to 
reduce costs by charging at off-peak hours.  

Site configuration and service will be designed to support the maximum range of charging requests, 
which can be optimized due to a high level of information on the charging group dynamics. Shared 
charging locations should be equipped with both overnight and fast charging systems as well as the 
capacity to introduce megawatt charging systems when they become more widely available in 2025, 
by installing underground infrastructure proactively. The adoption of BETs will require new strategies 
to  work  around  charging  requirements  while  maintaining  logistics  operations.  Shared  charging 
operators  should  therefore  consider  how  to  minimize  disruption  to  their  customers’  schedules.  By 
offering “valet” services to move vehicles from charging bays to secure parking lots or arranging drivers 
to transport vehicles back to their depot, operational sticking points related to BET adoption can be 

5 

 
 
 
Shared Charging for e-Trucks  

Concept Note 

addressed. Finally, the spatial configuration of a charging site should accommodate a maximum range 
of vehicle types (from vans to trucks) and configurations (with or without a trailer attached). These 
considerations will make charging more seamless and sooth concerns expressed in the working group, 
namely those around utilization rates and flexibility. 

Initiators of a shared charging location will assume this role based on logistics cluster characteristics. 
The initiator serves as the coordinating organization and may perform services as a legal entity on 
behalf of the participating network of companies.  Given the  fractured nature of the logistics sector, 
several “initiators” were considered to account for these dynamics. In the working group, the three 
most prominent initiator profiles were: 

1.  Charge  Point  Operator  (CPO)  led  -  where  a  traditional  charge  point  operator  provides  the 
infrastructure,  facilities,  and  administration,  but  restricts  access  to  only  participating 
companies;  

2.  Cooperatively  organized  -  where  a  group  of  neighboring  companies  pool  resources  and 

knowledge to develop a location amongst themselves; and 

3.  A leading company takes the initiative to build a charging site or liberalizes access to their 
already installed charging infrastructure. Awareness of these options expands the possibilities 
of shared charging initiation.  

In the graphic below, we have divided the above innovations into product (front end) and process (back 
end). The product side relates how the above concepts facilitate the users’ experience of the charging 
location, and how they answer our working group’s expectations of a shared charging location. The 
process  side  aligns  the  provision of  the  front-end experience with practical matters  related  to  their 
facilitation.  

Table 2. Innovation in Shared Charging Sites 

6 

 
 
 
 
Shared Charging for e-Trucks  

Concept Note 

Conclusions 
In the BET transition, shared charging should be embraced as a key resource to advance the much-
needed rollout of charging infrastructure. Given that the infrastructure component is a massive hurdle 
to BET adoption, this solution offers answers to the widespread challenges of overstretched energy 
grids, high investment costs, and a general lack of space available. If successfully realized, shared 
charging offers a clear solution path. The graphic below illustrates a solution space as a summary of 
this concept note.  

Figure 1. Summary of Concept Note Knowledge 

Future  research  on  shared  charging  should  include  investigation  of  financing  and  should  include 
discussions on lease agreements, utilization commitment levels, acceptable levels of investment risk. 
Additionally, there is need for clarity in the rules and regulations which will govern shared charging, 
and  these  must  be  addressed  and  made  visible  to  allow  maximum  support  for  a  collaborative 
endeavor.   

In addition to the calls for further research, Smart Freight Centre will plan to investigate opportunities 
for shared charging in our proof-of-concept projects. These opportunities include:  

Port of Rotterdam – the objective of this project is to electrify drayage operations in one of Europe’s 
busiest  ports.  In  doing  so,  we  will  identify  barriers  to  drayage  electrification  and  build  upon  the 
experience  to  scale  the  project  to  electrify  freight  beyond  the  radius  of  drayage,  into  road  freight. 
Shared charging will be explored in the working group discussions as a solution to enable charging 
amongst participants. 

Poland Corridor – the goal is to establish a first-to-market zero emission corridor(s) in Poland, building 
on upcoming EV incentives for trucks and charging. Shared charging will again be discussed as a 
measure to increase infrastructure utilization and availability.  

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Shared Charging for e-Trucks  

Concept Note 

For further literature on shared charging, please see the following:  

-  The 

United 

States’ 

National 

Zero-Emission 

Freight 

Corridor 

Strategy 

https://driveelectric.gov/files/zef-corridor-strategy.pdf  

-  Dutch government’s National Agenda on Charging Infrastructure  (pg. 12) *Dutch Language 
https://www.agendalaadinfrastructuur.nl/ondersteuning+gemeenten/documenten+en+links/do
cumenten+in+bibliotheek/handlerdownloadfiles.ashx?idnv=2301859 

-  The  Green  Finance  Institute  has  focused  on  numerous  financial  considerations  around  the 

BET transition https://www.greenfinanceinstitute.com/programmes/cdrt/ 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shared Charging for e-Trucks  

Concept Note 

Join our journey towards 
efficient and zero-emission 
global freight and logistics 

Contact 
Smart Freight Centre 

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Amsterdam, Netherlands 

Tel. office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org  

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
