Smart Freight
Procurement Guidelines
September 2019

Disclaimer
Smart  Freight  Centre  and  the  World  Business  Council  for  Sustainable  Development  authored  this  
publication.  The  views  expressed  in  this  publication  are  those  of  Smart  Freight  Centre  (SFC),  World  
Business  Council  for  Sustainable  Development  (WBCSD)  and  staff,  consultants  and  management,  
and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of  the  SFC  Board  of  Trustees  or  WBCSD  member  companies.  
SFC and WBCSD do not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and do not accept 
responsibility for the consequence of their use.

Acknowledgements 
Smart  Freight  Centre  has  developed  the  Smart  Freight  Procurement  Guidelines  as  part  of  WBCSD’s  
Transforming  Heavy  Transport  project,  co-financed  by  We  Mean  Business.  The  document  is  based  on  
existing  guidelines  and  practices  and  input  from  individual  companies  and  organizations,  as  well  as  the  
Global  Logistics  Emissions  Council  (GLEC)  led  by  SFC.  Its  inspiration  stems  from  the  New  Zealand  
Sustainable  Business  Council,  which  developed  sustainable  procurement  guidelines  with  its  member  
businesses in 2016. We would like to thank all companies and BSR who contributed to this publication.

About Smart Freight Centre 
Smart  Freight  Centre  is  a  global  mission-driven  organization  dedicated  to  a  more  efficient  and  low- 
emission  global  freight  sector.  We  bring  the  global  logistics  community  together  to  drive  transparency  
and mobilize multinational companies and their logistics partners to take action. This is done through global 
industry  guidelines  and  solutions  for  emissions  calculations,  reporting  and  reductions,  the  first  
of  which  is  the  Global  Logistics  Emissions  Council  (GLEC)  Framework,  and  by  recognizing  Smart  Freight 
Leaders. To scale our impact, we are present in Europe, the Americas and Asia; and we collaborate with 
existing initiatives, partner organizations and experts worldwide.

About WBCSD
WBCSD is a global, CEO-led organization of over 200 leading businesses working together to accelerate the 
transition to a sustainable world. We help make our member companies more successful and sustainable by 
focusing on the maximum positive impact for shareholders, the environment and societies.

Our member companies come from all business sectors and all major economies, representing a combined 
revenue of more than USD $8.5 trillion and 19 million employees. Our global network of almost 70 national 
business councils gives our members unparalleled reach across the globe. WBCSD is uniquely positioned to 
work with member companies along and across value chains to deliver impactful business solutions to the 
most challenging sustainability issues.

Together, we are the leading voice of business for sustainability: united by our vision of a world where more 
than 9 billion people are all living well and within the boundaries of our planet, by 2050.

www.wbcsd.org 

Follow us on:

Twitter 
@smartfreightctr
@wbcsd 

LinkedIn
www.linkedin.com/company/smart-freight-centre
www.linkedin.com/company/wbcsd

Suggested citation:
Smart Freight Centre and WBCSD.  

Authors:
Chiara Lepori, Sophie Punte and 

Smart Freight Procurement Guidelines (2019). 

Eszter Toth-Weedon of Smart Freight Centre  

ISBN 978-90-82-68790-3.

Mariana Heinrich of WBCSD

Contact
Smart Freight Centre

World Business Council 

Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM Amsterdam, Netherlands

for Sustainable Development

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT Amsterdam, Netherlands

Maison de la Paix, Chemin Eugène-Rigot 2B 

Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405
www.smartfreightcentre.org

info@smartfreightcentre.org

CP 2075 1211 Geneva 1, Switzerland
Tel office: +41 (0)22 839 31 71

www.wbcsd.org

2

3

 
Summary

in  logistics  
The  Smart  Freight  Procurement  (SFP)  Guidelines  provide  professionals  engaged 
procurement,  supply  chain  and  logistics  management,  and  logistics  emissions  management  with  an 
action-based guideline on how to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and air pollutants from their 
freight  transport  and  logistics  procurement  practices.  The  SFP  Guidelines  lead  organizations  in  their 
practical journey to low-carbon freight logistics and procurement.

The SFP Guidelines outline several actions that companies can take in four procurement phases: planning, 
tendering,  contracting  and  contract-based  supplier  management.  A  preliminary  phase  intended  to  set  
an  organization’s  internal  environment  and  ensure  its  readiness  to  undertake  the  actions  to  achieve  the  
low-carbon  procurement  of  smart  freight  and  logistics  services  precedes  the  four  operational  phases.  
In particular, top management support is critical to making the significant changes required to shift from  
a cost-focused procurement approach to a procurement process that also prioritizes reductions in GHG and 
air pollutant emissions.

An overview table displays all actions, allowing organizations to efficiently identify the detailed actions for 
implementation  relevant  to  them.  Specific  toolboxes  enable  organizations  to  immediately  understand  the 
actions  identified.  When  possible,  examples  from  company  experiences  and  best  practices  illustrate  the 
actions, highlighting how the action can contribute to GHG emissions reductions. The example’s description 
also outlines the impacts/lessons learned. 

By implementing the SFP Guidelines, organizations can map their alignment with low emissions logistics and 
freight  procurement  and 
implementation  of  the  
suggested actions. This alignment can extend to your organization’s entire logistics procurement policies 
and procedures. Alternatively, you may choose to only implement certain actions for a specific objective.

identify  and  address  existing  gaps  through  the 

List of abbreviations and acronyms

GHG 

GLEC 

KPI 

greenhouse gas

Global Logistics Emissions Council 

key performance indicator

LCTPi   

Low Carbon Technology Partnerships initiative

LSP 

RFP 

RFQ 

SFC 

SFL 

logistics service provider

request for proposal

request for quotation

Smart Freight Centre

Smart Freight Leadership

SFP Guidelines 

Smart Freight Procurement Guidelines

UN  

US  

US EPA 

WBCSD  

United Nations

United States of America

United States Environmental Protection Agency

World Business Council for Sustainable Development

4

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents

1  INTRODUCTION 

1.1  What are the SFP Guidelines 

1.2 

Target audience 

1.3 

Scope of the document 

1.4 

Structure of the document 

1.5  Reference material and development process 

1.6 

The guiding principles 

2  NAVIGATING THE SMART FREIGHT PROCUREMENT GUIDELINES 

2.1 

Freight procurement phases 

2.2  Action overview table 

2.3  How to use the SFP Guidelines 

3  ACTION CARDS 

3.1  Preliminary phase-related actions 

3.2  Planning phase-related actions 

8

8

8

8

9

9

10

12

12

14

15

16

16

18

3.3 

Tendering phase-related actions 

3.4  Contracting phase-related actions 

3.5  Contract-based supplier management-related actions 

4  COMPANY EXAMPLES 

4.1  Company examples – Overview 

4.2  Company-specific examples 

4.3  Examples applicable to many companies 

ANNEXES 

A. Smart Freight Leadership 

B. Sector initiatives 

C. Sources 

21

22

24

26

26

27

40

42

42

43

53

6

7

1 Introduction

Smart Freight Centre (SFC) and WBCSD drafted the Smart Freight Procurement Guidelines (SFP Guidelines) 
as  part  of  WBCSD’s  Transforming  Heavy  Transport  project.1  It  is  an  innovative  project  aimed  at  reducing 
emissions  from  freight  and  logistics  operations,  including  air,  sea,  land  and  transshipment  centers.  In 
collaboration with Smart Freight Centre and the We Mean Business coalition, it is working to find solutions to 
increase  demand  for  low-emissions  heavy  transport  and  achieve  our  vision  of  net-zero  logistics  emissions 
globally by 2050. 

Transforming Heavy Transport is a key project of the Low Carbon Technology Partnerships initiative (LCTPi). 
Since its launch at the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) to the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Paris, LCTPi has brought together more than 235 companies to bring climate 
solutions to scale.2

This document is also a supporting element of Smart Freight Leadership3 as part of the broader activities  
of SFC. The SFP Guidelines are one of SFC's global standardized guidelines for industry to calculate, report 
and reduce emissions, developed together with the Global Logistics Emissions Council (GLEC). 

The SFP Guidelines also complement the ‘Sustainable Freight Procurement Framework’ developed by BSR 
and members of the Clean Cargo and Sustainable Airfreight initiatives, to help companies evaluate, benchmark 
and improve their freight procurement practices. Together, SFC, WBCSD and BSR will continue to expand this 
practical toolbox to help business take climate action.

1.1  What are the SFP Guidelines 
The SFP Guidelines aim to provide guidance on how organizations, big or small, can leverage their freight 
transport and logistics procurement demands to make a positive impact on reducing GHG emissions and air 
pollutants across their freight transport and logistics supply chains.

Through  an  action-driven  approach,  the  SFP  Guidelines  provide  organizations  with  a  pathway  to  achieve  
low-carbon procurement of freight transport and logistics services. 

1.2  Target audience
We have developed the SFP Guidelines for any type of company or organization, irrespective of size, that is 
interested in embedding GHG emission and air pollutant reductions in its freight procurement procedures.

The target audience of the guidelines comprises professionals engaged in the management or execution of 
logistics and/or environmental management, including functions and responsibilities such as:
•  Logistics procurement;
•  Supply chain and logistics management; and
•  Logistics emissions management.

1.3  Scope of the document
The SFP Guidelines cover all transport modes and logistics sites across the global logistics supply chain. We 
have  taken  a  general  approach  while  recognizing  that  in  its  practical  application  there  will  be  specific 
challenges  for  different  modalities.  Future  expansions  of  the  SFP  Guidelines  may  elaborate  on  different 
modalities and application contexts.

The  primary  focus  of  this  document  is  the  reduction  of  GHG  and  air  pollutant  emissions.  The  Guidelines  
aim  to  support  organizations  in  their  transition  to  become  a  low-carbon  business.  They  can  achieve  this  
by  addressing  freight  and  logistics  procurement  activities  through  the  specific  actions  suggested  in  the  
SFP Guidelines.

1.4  Structure of the document
We have organized the SFP Guidelines into four chapters:
•  Chapter 1 introduces the document, its scope and structure and the target audience. It also  

defines keywords;

•  Chapter 2 explains how to navigate the document, facilitating its use in daily company activities  

and operations;

•  Chapter 3 is the toolbox. It details the actions logistics procurement departments can take to embed  
  GHG emissions and air pollutant reduction objectives in a company’s freight procurement process.  
  Action cards summarize their expected impact and link with SFP Guidelines guiding principles and  

provide guidance for implementation. Furthermore, the action cards include references to examples   
from companies related to the implementation of those specific actions;

•  Chapter 4 contains descriptions of examples referred to in the various actions in Chapter 3. One example  

can be relevant to more than one of the suggested actions.

The annexes at the end of the document provide details on:
•  How the SFP Guidelines link with SFC’s broader strategy (Annex A: Smart Freight Leadership);
•  Sector initiatives that organizations can join to work together with others to achieve sustainable freight  

and logistics, including GHG emissions reductions4 (Annex B: Sector initiatives);

•  The main sources used to develop the SFP Guidelines (Annex C: Sources).

1.5  Reference material and development process
We have developed the SFP Guidelines based on a review of business practices and theory on logistics 
procurement from July 2018 to October 2018:
•  The analysis of smart freight procurement-related business processes through interviews with more  

than 10 multinational companies;

•  The review of 11 smart freight procurement guidelines and initiatives worldwide;
•  The review of relevant professional and academic literature and company practices related to green  

freight procurement.

We  shared  the  first  working  draft  of  the  SFP  Guidelines  with  a  working  group  composed  of  experts  and 
business  practitioners,  among  them  the  business  community  comprising  WBCSD’s  Transforming  Heavy 
Transport  project  and  the  Global  Logistics  Emissions  Council  (GLEC).  We  used  the  feedback  collected  to 
prepare a second version submitted for a second review. 

8

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Guiding principles of the SFP Guidelines

Transparency

Collaboration

Leadership &
Innovation

1.6  The guiding principles
The  SFP  Guidelines  are  based  on  relevant  principles  identified  during  the  review  of  existing  sustainable 
procurement  guidance  and  initiatives  and  from  interviews  conducted  with  multinational  companies  (see 
section  1.5).  We  identify  three  guiding  principles  that  address  the  needs  of  organizations  and  embed  the 
recommendations received and elaborated during the SFP Guidelines drafting process itself: transparency, 
collaboration, and leadership and innovation.

A strong smart freight procurement process should include at least these three guiding principles to reach 
a complete approach. Whereas each principle is important by itself, focusing on only one or two will not be 
as effective in reaching maximum impact. (see Figure 1).

Transparency on emission reporting, the way shippers use the data they receive from the handling of their 
products  by  their  logistics  service  providers,  and  sharing  best  practices  are  among  the  actions  that  can 
improve  the  understanding  of  practices  along  the  entire  logistics  operations  value  chain  and  help  to  set 
targets. Such transparency drives understanding of how to improve the journey to low-carbon freight.

Collaboration  between  the  different  parties  procuring  or  supplying  logistics  services  is  fundamental  to 
achieving measurable and impactful supply chain emissions reductions. It can have a real and positive impact 
on the long-term sustainability of business relationships among supply chain partners as it has the power to 
enable cost savings through the establishment of standardized processes.

Innovation  and  leadership  help  organizations  break  away  from  business  as  usual  and  accelerate  the 
incorporation of improved solutions within the logistics procurement process to meet new requirements and 
the potentially unarticulated needs of climate-conscious organizations.

10

11

2 Navigating the Smart Freight      
   Procurement Guidelines

This chapter helps companies navigate the SFP Guidelines and efficiently determine appropriate actions for 
a specific activity in their organization. A summary table (section 2.2) lists the actions according to the four 
phases of the procurement process.

2.1  Freight procurement phases
The companies interviewed (see section 1.5) described their logistics procurement process using different 
terminologies;  they  also  ordered  and  grouped  actions  and  procurement  steps  in  different  ways.  We  have 
organized these varying company inputs under common denominations. We subsequently determined four 
main freight procurement phases: 
1.  Planning: the preparatory phase, which includes the identification of needs, budget definition, a project  
  management plan, the identification of responsibilities, and a general supplier assessment – in line with  

the organization’s business and procurement strategy;

2.  Tendering: tender definition (including procedure, award criteria, technical specifications, bidder- 
related aspects, environmental and social aspects, financial information, formal aspects), public  
tendering (where applicable) and the evaluation of the tenders;

3.  Contracting: the specification of the contract terms, supplier selection and contract negotiations,  

agreement on qualitative and quantitative key performance indicators (KPIs) and monitoring activities;  
the planning phase should include early stages of this phase;

4.  Contract-based supplier management: monitoring of supplier performance using qualitative and  

quantitative KPIs. Identifying future improvement areas and best practices. 

While individual companies may have different numbers or types of phases, these SFP Guidelines use the 
four phases to provide a coherent approach. 

Prior to starting with the four phases, it is important to understand the organization’s structure to establish 
if the procurement department can take responsibility for and has the capacity and the capability to apply the 
actions provided in these guidelines. This is the Preliminary phase.

Figure 2: Preliminary phase followed by the four phases of the procurement process

Planning

1

Preliminary

0

Tendering

2

Contracting

3

Contract-based 
Supplier Management

4

12

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3  How to use the SFP Guidelines

The action overview table in the previous chapter allows you to identify the actions your organization should 
take in its journey to achieving low-emissions freight transport and logistics procurement.

The classification of implementation complexity allows your organization to prioritize the actions to take – 
progressively  moving  up  in  complexity  to  fulfill  the  set  commitments.  This  is  particularly  helpful  for 
organizations  that  have  not  yet  started  their  low-carbon  procurement  journey.  By  starting  with  simpler 
actions,  organizations  can  plan  their  own  implementation  path  in  line  with  their  maturity  level.  Maturity 
refers to the level of implementation of existing activities for low-carbon freight and logistics procurement 
for a specific organization.

Depending on your organization’s current approach to sustainable procurement and its maturity level, 
there are two main ways to use the SFP Guidelines:
1.  To structurally improve your organization’s existing procedures and policies for low-carbon  

procurement;

2.  To use certain suggested actions, verifying your organization’s existing low-emissions procurement  

strategy and/or identifying areas for improvement.

In both cases, it is possible to implement the SFP Guidelines as follows:
•  Map how the suggested SFP actions outlined in Table 1 (section 2.2) are aligned with your organization’s 

practices and process;

•  Using the action cards (chapter 3), identify the gaps between current practices and suggested actions;
•  Analyze how to address the gaps identified and what your company needs to enable low-emissions  

logistics and freight procurement;

•  Draft or review your organization’s current logistics procurement policies and procedures based on the  
gaps identified, including a comparison and evaluation of alignment of the current guiding principles   

  with the SFP Guidelines (see section 1.6).

2.2  Action overview table
The overview table below summarizes the actions suggested in the SFP Guidelines, grouping them into the 
Preliminary phase and the four freight procurement phases as identified previously. 

Each action reports the expected impact and the complexity of implementation. The last column shows the guiding 
principles (see section 1.6) attributed to each action. The complexity of the implementation is on a scale of 1 to 5.5

Table 1: Action overview table

Procurement
phase

Action

SFP

Guidelines

ID Name

ID   Name

Impact

Complexity

principles

0  Preliminary

1  Planning

0.1 Top management  

engagement

0.2 Award scheme  
establishment

1.1  Set up support for  
low-carbon freight  
procurement

Gain top management support 
in implementing the SFP 
Guidelines, including the 
possibility for the procurement 
department to choose higher 
prices if this would help reduce 
the organization’s GHG foot-
print, thus avoiding having 
costs overrule activities in  
the following phases

Include low-carbon criteria  
in rewarding staff and  
management performance, 
thus boosting real behavior 
change

Achieve organization-wide 
support for the procurement 
strategy, aiming to reduce  
GHG emissions

1.2 Build low-carbon  

supply chain capacity

Prepare the organization  
to establish a low-carbon  
supply chain

1.3  Focus your network on
low-carbon emissions 

Establish reduced carbon 
footprint supply chain

1.4 Engage with  
suppliers

Establish two-way 
communication with 
suppliers to achieve GHG 
emissions reductions

2.1 Revise qualification  

procedure to include  
low-carbon criteria

Establish capacity to select 
suppliers matching its 
low-carbon criteria

2  Tendering

2.2 Categorize the  

suppliers

Increase supplier 
awareness of carbon 
emissions reductions

2.3 Share incentives  
for low-carbon  
behaviors

Improve supplier behavior to  
achieve carbon emissions 
reductions

3.1  Define the low- 

carbon-oriented  
contractors

Ensure supplier behavior aims  
to reduce carbon emissions

3.2 Allow exceptions  

to achieve  
innovation

Enable and support suppliers' 
innovative behavior to reduce 
carbon emissions

4.1 Monitor & report

Enhance supply chain  
transparency

4.2 Support suppliers  

and expert  
leadership

4.3 Collaborate

Encourage suppliers to  
maintain and improve  
emissions reductions efforts

Implement concrete actions  
to achieve performance- 
based improvements

3  Contracting

4  Contract-
  based
  Supplier
  Management

Collaboration
Leadership & 
Innovation

Transparency

Leadership & 
Innovation

Leadership & 
Innovation

Leadership & 
Innovation

Transparency
Collaboration

Collaboration 
Leadership &  
Innovation

Transparency 
Leadership &  
Innovation

Collaboration  
Leadership &  
Innovation

Collaboration  
Leadership 
Innovation 
Transparency

Collaboration
Leadership & 
Innovation

Transparency

Leadership & 
Innovation

Collaboration

14

15

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3  Action cards

This is the SFP Guidelines toolbox. Here we detail the actions needed to embed GHG emissions reductions 
within your organization’s freight transport procurement process. The actions listed below follow the four 
freight procurement phases described in section 2.1.

Such  actions  are  presented  in  tabular  form  (as  cards),  which  include  a  title  for  each  action  followed  by  
the  estimated  implementation  complexity  on  a  scale  1  to  5  (see  sections  2.2  and  2.3)  shown  as  circles,  
the  expected  impact,  and  the  guidance  for  its  implementation.  The  cards  include  references  to  company 
examples related to the implementation of the specific action. Chapter 4 details the examples.

3.1  Preliminary phase-related actions

Action 0.1 – Top management engagement

Impact: Gain top management support in implementing the SFP Guidelines, including the possibility 
for the procurement department to not prioritize cost as the most important decision criteria. This 
will help avoid having costs overrule activities in the following phases.

Toolbox
•  Define a clear business case to justify the actions undertaken to achieve low-carbon procurement  
for freight and logistics services based on expected commercial and reputational benefits. It is  
necessary to identify relevant key performance indicators to support the business case definition (see  
  Action 0.2 – Award scheme establishment). Furthermore, when formulating the business case, consider:

•  Linking a smart freight procurement plan to the organization’s overall business and  

sustainability plan;

•  Demonstrating positive return on investment related to logistics investments (e.g.,  

reduced fuel consumption should lead to lower costs);

•  Demonstrating improved brand reputation and competitive advantage, including  improved

customer satisfaction;

•  The increased possibility of attracting and retaining a talented workforce in logistics and

supply chain functions;

•  Highlighting improved supply chain risk management capabilities;
•  The cost of carbon where logistics emissions are likely to be relevant in the future (e.g.,  
investments in new warehouse and distribution locations, suppliers and carbon pricing);

•  Demonstrating enhanced shareholder and investor satisfaction through voluntary reporting

and disclosure (see the bullet point for investor initiatives below).

•  Provide top management with information and materials to support their decision- 
  making process and ensure their engagement. Useful sources are:

•  Case studies describing companies that have successfully introduced sustainable  

procurement practices and the benefits they have obtained;

•  An overview of sustainability requirements from Investor Initiatives6 and relevant sector 

initiatives7 that are applicable to the organization;

•  An overview of competitors’ actions to demonstrate the need to catch up to or use sustainable 

 logistics procurement to stay ahead of the competition.

 •  Involve top management in the development or review of sustainable procurement principles and  
processes. In both cases, you should involve top management in the implementation of the SFP  

  Guidelines following the identification of the organization’s needs. You should also keep them informed  

throughout the implementation of the steps suggested in section 2.3, meaning:
•  Mapping of the suggested SFP Guidelines actions versus your organization’s existing practices  

and processes; 
Identifying gaps between your organization’s current practices and the suggested actions; 
• 
•  Analyzing how to address the gaps identified and what your company needs to enable low- 

emissions logistics and freight procurement; 

•  Drafting or reviewing your organization’s current logistics procurement policies and procedures  

based on the gaps identified using the SFP Guidelines, including comparison and alignment of the  
current procurement principles with those proposed in the SFP Guidelines.

Examples 
A.P. Moller-Maersk Group 
IKEA 
Nike 
Philips   
Unilever 

Responsible Procurement Programme
IWAY Standard on Purchasing Products, Materials and Services
Sustainable Manufacturing & Sourcing Index
SPLC Guidance for Leadership in Sustainable Purchasing 
Responsible Sourcing Policy 

Action 0.2 – Award scheme establishment

Impact: Include low-carbon criteria in rewarding internal staff and supplier performance, thus boosting real 
behavior change.

Toolbox
•  Make low-carbon criteria relevant to your company’s logistics staff and establish individual KPIs  
and performance tracking. Your company can track and measure the  relevant key performance 
indicators internally or hire third party evaluators.
Introduce incentives, bonuses and clear recognition for logistics and sustainability staff and  

• 
  management involved in logistics procurement and sustainability improvements.
•  Establish an award scheme for suppliers to recognize low-carbon behavior: Consider adopting a  

theory-based approach to stimulate low-carbon freight and logistics. The theory-based approach could  
be a mix of economics and behavioral science, taking into account unaligned goals among the company  
and its suppliers (agency theory8). Under such an approach, it is possible to classify logistics service  
providers (LSPs) based on their responsiveness to awards offered by their clients (shipper stimuli9).

Examples 
DHL Global Forwarding 
HEINEKEN 

Port of Rotterdam 
Van der Stelt  

GoGreen rating scheme to evaluate air & ocean freight carriers
Boosting internal initiatives to achieve supply chain  
sustainability 
Discounts on port dues for sustainable vessels
The CO2 Performance Ladder 

16

17

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2  Planning phase-related actions

Action 1.1 – Set up support for low-carbon freight procurement

Impact: Achieve organization-wide support for the procurement strategy, aiming to reduce  
GHG emissions.

Toolbox
•  Define your organization’s goals:

•  Create an internal team to lead low-carbon freight and logistics actions, including procurement.
•  Run an initial session with procurement/supply chain/logistics teams to understand the  

organization’s current priorities and processes the and clearly articulate low-carbon freight  
transport and logistics goals.

•  Align freight and logistics procurement objectives throughout the organization:

•  Decide on overarching requirements for low-carbon logistics procurement that are key to  

improving logistics performance (e.g., the provision of key and verified supplier data to allow  
the company to calculate and track logistics KPIs). Annex B: Sector initiatives offers an  
extensive list of relevant requirements. 

•  Align logistics procurement with broader procurement and organizational objectives by 

translating high-level objectives into specific ones for logistics procurement.

•  Set the values for KPIs and targets of the key management functions10 involved in logistics  

procurement.

•  Adopt low-carbon selection criteria for LSPs and carriers:

•  Conduct LSP evaluation using multi-criteria decision-making, considering various  criteria to  

push them to incorporate environmental best practices (e.g., evaluate the  level of cooperation  
with the carrier, require carriers to establish an environmental management system,  
a sustainable process design, and/or an efficient network design, and progressively reduce  
their energy consumption).

•  Organize the selection of LSPs from an environmental sustainability perspective by using 

advanced models,11 possibly collaborating with universities and research centers.

•  Establish contracting terms for suppliers:

•  Translate low-carbon freight and logistics goals into applicable contracting terms; also consider  

potential misalignment of contractual arrangements among parties (agency theory12).

•  Embed KPIs and their preliminary benchmark values in contracts with suppliers according to  

the award scheme established through Action 0.2 – Award scheme establishment.13  
Give preference to simple, transparent and widely known KPIs to facilitate replication for  
suppliers who serve several shippers.

Examples
Dow Chemical 
IKEA 
Johnson & Johnson 
Van der Stelt 
Walmart 

Global Emissions Inventory (GEI)
IWAY Standard on Purchasing Products, Materials and Services
Using sustainability to strengthen carrier relationships
The CO2 Performance Ladder
Ambitious fleet efficiency targets result in considerable savings

Action 1.2 – Build low-carbon supply chain capacity

Impact: Prepare the organization to establish a low-carbon supply chain.

Toolbox
•  Model the integrated logistics network with the objective of maximizing suppliers’ low-carbon  

scores, if possible, using operational research techniques:14 
•  Check your organization’s capability to model such networks or supply chains according to 
the business’ low-carbon freight and logistics goals articulated through Action 1.1 – Set up  
support for low-carbon freight procurement. 
If necessary, get external support to model the network or ensure internal capability.

• 

•  Check that your supply chain’s current capacity (infrastructure) fits the desired model.  

If necessary, run a capacity building stage and an engineering phase to identify and implement 
new and innovative logistics solutions.

• 

Integrate the strategic selection of logistics partners with operational flow planning decisions.15

Examples
Home Depot  

Johnson & Johnson 

Supply chain restructuring, bidding process rethinking, carrier rating,  
collaboration
Using sustainability to strengthen carrier relationships

Action 1.3 – Focus your network on low-carbon emissions

Impact: Establish reduced carbon footprint supply chain.

Toolbox
• 

Identify the fields of LSP and carrier activity in your network that you want to influence (e.g., reduce  
transport intensity and emissions, carrier selection criteria). Determine:
•  Possibilities to enable logistics providers to adopt sustainable practices, such as allowing grouping  

of your freight;

•  Possibilities to exert direct influence on a logistics provider's activity, such as ensuring carrier  

certification or training.16 

•  Customize your supply chain: Consider the adoption of the proper Incoterms (International Commercial 

Terms)17 in the purchase and sale of goods, based on the amount of leverage that the organization aims to  
exert on “carbon-sensitive” decisions.

Examples
Home Depot   

IKEA 
Johnson & Johnson 
Jumbo   
Multinational Shippers (China) 

Supply chain restructuring, bidding process rethinking, carrier rating, 
collaboration
IWAY Standard on Purchasing Products, Materials and Services
Using sustainability to strengthen carrier relationships
Collaboration between retailer, product suppliers and LSPs
Smart Transport Manager Training

18

19

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Action 1.4 – Engage with suppliers

Impact: Establish two-way communication with suppliers to achieve carbon emissions reductions.

Toolbox
•  Communicate emissions calculations and reporting requirements to LSPs and freight operators in a  

standardized way:
•  Provide guidance on what data to collect and how to report them;
•  Explain to your suppliers how you will use the data collected and how can they incorporate actions  

to reduce emissions and improve their decision-making.

•  Differentiate supplier engagement formats:

•  Customize the engagement formats based on supplier size, location and maturity (e.g., supplier  
summits, smaller sector forums, or possibly online portals for sharing best practices, education  
and training);
In the customization of the engagement format, consider the different levels of sophistication of  
LSPs and carriers, which impacts their internal and external behavior because supply chain  
operators have different levels of sophistication around the world; tailor the engagement  
approach/strategy accordingly.

• 

•  Demonstrate corporate leadership by supporting your suppliers:

•  Provide clear information to suppliers about your (shippers’) GHG emissions reductions  expectations  

and the resulting expectations for their supply chain in turn;

•  Foster collaboration and enable progress on achieving sustainability by providing your suppliers  

with self-assessment tools and checklists;

•  Provide clear business cases that could enable your suppliers to approach GHG emissions  

reductions as a business development and investment opportunity;

•  Clarify your intention when forming strategic partnerships with sustainable logistics providers, 
thereby enabling business operation improvements by focusing on the company’s core  
competencies;

•  Provide freight and logistics service providers with guidance on their internal communication and  

collaboration between procurement, supply chain and sustainability departments; 

•  Consider helping any existing suppliers who are underperforming in GHG emission activities to  
  match your organization’s ambitions (e.g., support training on improving the fuel efficiency  

of their fleet).

Examples
Braskem 
Ford Motor Company 

Johnson & Johnson 
Multinational Shippers (China) 
Nike 
Unilever 
Applicable to all companies 
Applicable to all companies 

A vertical approach to supplier engagement
Applying GEMI’s Quick Guide to Strategic Buyer/Supplier 
Collaboration on Sustainability
Using sustainability to strengthen carrier relationships
Smart Transport Manager Training
Sustainable Manufacturing & Sourcing Index
Responsible Sourcing Policy
GLEC Declaration
Shippers and LSPs using SmartWay data to inform  
transportation purchasing decisions

3.3  Tendering phase-related actions

Action 2.1 – Revise qualification procedure to include  

     low-carbon criteria

Impact: Company has the capacity to select suppliers that match its low-carbon criteria.

Toolbox
•  Define a standardized qualification procedure that prioritizes carriers and LSPs that adopt  
low-carbon freight and logistics considerations following the low-carbon selection criteria  
identified under Action 1.1 – Set up support for low-carbon freight procurement:
• 

Include standardized request for proposal (RFP)/request for quotation (RFQ) wording in    
tendering documents, possibly through a checklist. The wording has to align with the proposed  
set of KPIs (Action 1.1 – Set up support for low-carbon freight procurement) and the data to provide. 

•  Apply relevant low-carbon assessment criteria adopted by the organization as per Action 1.1  

– Set up support for low-carbon freight procurement:
•  Compare LSPs and carriers on their reported emissions, overall performance and  

improvement actions;

•  Assess suppliers not only on their service delivery performance but also on their  corporate  

GHG reduction strategy and on their capacity to identify and implement  innovative solutions to  
reduce emissions.

• 

Include in the qualification procedure an analysis of strengths and weaknesses of the potential  
logistics partners. Decision-makers in the contracting organization can the use   this information to  
identify the most suitable suppliers with whom to establish and maintain a long-term partnership.

•  Engage your sector initiatives (Annex B: Sector initiatives) and use their tools and questionnaires  

to assess your suppliers. 

Examples
Home Depot  

Schneider 
Van der Stelt 
Applicable to all companies 

Supply chain restructuring, bidding process rethinking,  
carrier rating, collaboration
How to create an effective transportation RFP
The CO2 Performance Ladder
SmartWay's RFP specification

Action 2.2 – Categorize suppliers

Impact: Increase supplier awareness of carbon emissions reductions.

Toolbox
•  Categorize LSPs by their low-carbon behavior:

•  Consider a potential conflict of interest with both your shippers and LSPs (agency theory18) in the  

design of the categorization criteria and the possible subsequent incentive mechanism;

•  Categorize LSPs in line with the adoption of low-carbon selection criteria for LSPs and  carriers as  

per Action 1.1 – Set up support for low-carbon freight procurement;

•  Use a categorization system that allows the inclusion of different levels of supplier sophistication  

around the world.

•  Share information on categorization with suppliers to enable transparency, the establishment of an  

improvement feedback cycle, and the establishment and development of low-carbon behavior.

20

21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Examples
A.P. Moller-Maersk Group 
Braskem 
DHL Global Forwarding 
Home Depot   

Nike 
Unilever 

Responsible Procurement Programme
A vertical approach to supplier engagement
GoGreen rating scheme to evaluate air & ocean freight carriers
Supply chain restructuring, bidding process rethinking, carrier rating,  
collaboration
Sustainable Manufacturing & Sourcing Index
Responsible Sourcing Policy

Action 2.3 – Share incentives for low-carbon behaviors

Impact: Improve supplier behavior to achieve carbon emissions reductions.

Toolbox
•  Build market-based mechanisms, such as emissions trading, into your tender specification,  
  which can act as an incentive for shippers to lower emissions within their supply chains.

•  This must be in accordance with the award scheme for the suppliers’ low-carbon behavior    

established in Action 0.2– Award scheme establishment.

•  Embed the market-based mechanism for sharing incentives with suppliers into the contracting terms  

for suppliers established through Action 1.1 – Set up support for low-carbon freight procurement:
•  To influence supplier behavior, reward their low-carbon efforts with discounts and/or longer contracts.

Examples 
Port of Rotterdam 

Discounts on port dues for sustainable vessels

•  Promote the development of emissions reductions initiatives and joint strategic development  
plans in collaboration with LSPs. The long-term perspective of the relationship between the  
buyer and its LSPs also promotes the development of joint initiatives in collaboration between  
the buyer and the provider. It is possible for buyers  to participate actively in the development  
of the green service offerings of their LSPs.19 

•  Detail service specifications:

• 

Include KPIs and reporting requirements in GHG emissions performance in the contract, as
established in Action 1.1 – Set up support for low-carbon freight procurement and Action 1.4  
– Engage suppliers.

•  Adapt service specifications to enable low-carbon freight and logistics by considering the  

following points: 
I)  Changing transport lead time specifications may offer opportunities to reduce costs in  

II) 

combination with reduced environmental impacts;
Including a minimum order quantity or other similar requirements can lead to a decrease  
in the number of shipments;

III)  Increasing the understanding of each other’s operations allows the detailing of better  

service specifications, facilitating more efficient and effective operations;

IV)  It is possible to achieve long-term improvements if transport buyers and LSPs jointly  

demand the inclusion of low-emissions actions with reasonable environmental goals in  
their contracts; 
It is best to develop new solutions in collaboration with LSPs, making use of their expertise.

V) 

Examples
Home Depot 

Johnson & Johnson 

Supply chain restructuring, bidding process rethinking, carrier  
rating, collaboration
Using sustainability to strengthen carrier relationships

3.4  Contracting phase-related actions

Action 3.2 – Allow exceptions to achieve innovation

Action 3.1 – Define the low-carbon-oriented contract

Impact: Ensure supplier behavior aims to reduce carbon emissions. 

Toolbox
•  Define and prepare the contract:

•  Take into account the terms established in Action 1.1 –Set up support for low-carbon freight  
procurement, ensuring in particular that the contract terms support such procurement;

•  Clearly state low-carbon requirements in the freight and logistics contract:

I)  Adapt the corporate social responsibility GHG emissions reductions clauses to the  

• 

supplier (size/sector/country);
Include in the contract the possibility of verifications and audits, penalties and termination clauses.
II) 
Include a bonus system in the contract based on the progressive achievement of KPIs defined  
in Action 1.1 – Set up support for low-carbon freight procurement to incentivize supplier    
behavior to achieve carbon emissions reductions.

•  Promote long-term partnerships with longer contracts (at least 12 months), if possible  
factoring joint emissions reduction goals into the process to improve environmental  
performance without having a negative impact on cost. Longer term contracts and joint  
development would likely enhance the level of emissions reduction initiatives. Longer term  
contracts may indirectly result in an opportunity for the buyer to influence LSPs to increase  
commitments to lower emissions; interaction with employees on different levels in the  
company, including top management, can further boost this.

Impact: Enable and support suppliers' innovative behavior to reduce carbon emissions.

Toolbox
•  Allow for exceptions in the behavior of freight and logistics suppliers to push for emissions  

reductions:
•  Exceptions in relation to the service specification established in Action 3.1 – Define the  low- 

carbon-oriented contract (e.g., modifications of lead time, pick-up and delivery times,  transport  

  mode/s) are allowed.
•  Buyers can often be a barrier to the development of green initiatives, limiting the providers’    

investments into green technology.20 One way of addressing this problem is to be willing to  pay extra  
for innovative, low-emissions solutions in line with the impact expected from the  implementation of  
Action 0.1 – Top management engagement.

Examples
None, as yet.

22

23

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.5  Contract-based supplier management-related actions

Action 4.1 – Monitor & report

Impact: Enhance supply chain transparency. 

Toolbox
•  Drive supply chain transparency through KPI monitoring and reporting as agreed in Action 1.1  

– Set up support for low-carbon freight procurement: 
•  Adopt standardized reporting formats;
•  Do not set too many KPIs;
•  Give preference to KPIs that are transparent and most commonly used in freight and logistics.  

This will help suppliers streamline their reporting efforts with multiple customers.

•  Use both internal and external communications to make sure that your employees, customers  

and other stakeholders are aware of your smart freight procurement actions and results:
•  Provide suppliers with clear feedback on the use of the monitored KPIs and data;
•  Share the different scores your suppliers are receiving according to their performance when  

taking action to reduce emissions;

•  Consider establishing a feedback mechanism to detail the benefits that your organization  is deriving  

from suppliers’ low-carbon behavior to encourage their further investment  and commitment.

Examples
Braskem 
Nike 
Van der Stelt  
Applicable to all companies 
Applicable to all companies 

A vertical approach to supplier engagement
Sustainable Manufacturing & Sourcing Index
The CO2 Performance Ladder
GLEC Declaration
Shippers and LSPs using SmartWay Data to inform  transportation  
purchasing decisions

Action 4.2 – Support suppliers and exert leadership

Impact: Encourage suppliers to maintain and improve the emissions reduction efforts.

Toolbox
•  Design a process/tool to support LSPs and carriers with different levels of sophistication to  

implement concrete actions for improvement in a systemic way, encouraging them to embrace all  
organization processes instead of tackling them on a project basis.

•  Support freight and logistics service providers in promoting continuous communication  and  

collaboration between their procurement, supply chain and sustainability departments,  following  
the activities started in Action 1.4 – Engage with suppliers.

•  Support low-emissions road mapping by LSPs and carriers and provide guidance on their  

assessment to help identify options for improvement.

•  Recognize the actions and improvements that LSPs and carriers make to comply with  contractual  
  GHG emissions reductions expectations, e.g., following the award scheme for  suppliers suggested  

under Action 0.2 – Award scheme establishment.

Examples
A.P. Moller-Maersk Group 
Braskem 

Responsible Procurement Programme
A vertical approach to supplier engagement

DHL Global Forwarding 
Home Depot  

Johnson & Johnson 
Multinational Shippers (China) 
Nike 
Port of Rotterdam 

GoGreen rating scheme to evaluate air & ocean freight carriers
Supply chain restructuring, bidding process rethinking,  carrier  
rating, collaboration
Using sustainability to strengthen carrier relationships
Smart Transport Manager Training
Sustainable Manufacturing & Sourcing Index
Discounts on port dues for sustainable vessels

Action 4.3 – Collaborate

Impact: Implement concrete actions to achieve performance-based improvements.

Toolbox
•  Establish and maintain broader cooperation with supplier personnel at various levels: 

•  The strongest drivers among suppliers are their internal sales and operations management  

personnel. The implementation of an engagement plan to establish trustworthy relationships with  
LSP and carrier employees beyond top management can further enhance collaboration on  
incorporating environmental best practices throughout the logistics supply chain.

•  We advise you to consider the different levels of sophistication of suppliers to properly approach the  

cooperation strategy.

•  Collaborate with freight and logistics service providers:

•  Provide suppliers with clear feedback on their performance;
•  Collaborate with suppliers on innovation, including through Green Freight Programs;21 
•  Collaborate across the entire supply chain to reduce risks; good business relationships and supply  

chain insights support managers in delivering a company's corporate social responsibility policy,  
including GHG emissions reductions, which improves risk management.

• 

Implement joint strategic development plans with LSPs and carriers, following the contract defined  
under Action 3.1 – Define the low-carbon-oriented contract:
• 

Identify and implement opportunities for future improvements and innovation with suppliers and  
favor potential gain sharing;

•  Recognize that small LSPs have more potential to perform joint development plans with  shippers,  

as large LSPs generally have their own development plans for low-emissions freight;

•  Consider providing unique grants or other financial support to launch low-emissions freight  solutions  

by LSPs and collaboration on low-carbon freight projects. 

Examples
A.P. Moller-Maersk Group 
Ford Motor Company 

Home Depot   

Jumbo   
Unilever 
Walmart 
applicable to all companies 

Responsible Procurement Programme
Applying GEMI’s Quick Guide to Strategic Buyer/Supplier  
Collaboration on Sustainability
Supply chain restructuring, bidding process rethinking, carrier  
rating, collaboration
Collaboration between retailer, product suppliers and LSPs
Responsible Sourcing Policy
Ambitious fleet efficiency targets result in considerable savings
FreightShare Lab’s asset sharing platform

24

25

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4  Company examples

This chapter provides examples of companies implementing actions aligned with the guiding principles of the 
SFP Guidelines.

#  Company 

Title

The examples illustrate how the actions detailed in chapter 3 can lead to measurable emissions reductions 
throughout the preliminary and the four procurement phases. Each example may be relevant to one or more 
actions. We may enrich the list of examples in the future.

4.1  Company examples – Overview

Table 2 provides an overview of the examples that organizations are implementing or can implement.

There are two categories:
•  Company  specific,  i.e.,  examples  from  company  experience,  provided  by  the  companies  mentioned  or  

drafted on the basis of publicly available information (no. 1-18);

•  Examples  companies  are  implementing  or  can  implement  and  that  are  applicable  to  many  companies  

(no. 19-22).

We have highlighted the company-specific examples provided verbatim and/or signed off by the respective 
company with an asterisk in square brackets next to the title. Whereas the Schneider example in this section 
does not specifically focus on emissions reductions, the majority of contributing members found it useful as 
a pertinent example of the different steps in building an effective RFQ, which is key to addressing emissions 
reduction in the process.

Table 2: Overview of company examples

#  Company 

Title

A.P. Moller-Maersk Group 

1 
2  Braskem 
3  DHL Global Forwarding 
4  Dow Chemical 
5 

Ford Motor Company 

Responsible Procurement Programme
A vertical approach to supplier engagement
GoGreen rating scheme to evaluate air & ocean freight carriers [*]
Global Emissions Inventory (GEI) [*]
Applying GEMI’s Quick Guide to Strategic Buyer/Supplier  
Collaboration on Sustainability
Boosting internal initiatives to achieve supply chain sustainability [*]
IWAY Standard on Purchasing Products, Materials and Services
Using sustainability to strengthen carrier relationships
Collaboration between retailer, product suppliers and LSPs

6  HEINEKEN 
IKEA 
7 
Johnson & Johnson 
8 
9 
Jumbo   
10  Multinational Shippers (China)  Smart Transport Manager Training
11  Nike 
12  Philips   
13  Port of Rotterdam 
14  Schneider 
15  Home Depot 

Sustainable Manufacturing & Sourcing Index
Case from SPLC Guidance for Leadership in Sustainable Purchasing 
Discounts on port dues for sustainable vessels [*]
How to create an effective transportation RFP
Supply chain restructuring, bidding process rethinking, carrier 
rating, collaboration
Responsible Sourcing Policy [*]

16  Unilever 

26

17  Van der Stelt 
18  Walmart 
19  Applicable to many companies  FreightShare Lab’s asset sharing platform
20  Applicable to many companies  GLEC Declaration
21  Applicable to many companies 

The CO2 Performance Ladder [*]
 Ambitious fleet efficiency targets result in considerable savings

Shippers and LSPs using SmartWay data to inform  transportation  
purchasing decisions

22  Applicable to many companies  SmartWay's RFP specification

4.2  Company-specific examples

A.P. Moller-Maersk Group – Responsible Procurement Programme22

As part of its main Sustainability Strategy 2014-2018, A.P. Moller-Maersk Group put in place mandatory 
programs to ensure compliance with minimum standards for anti-corruption, responsible procurement 
and global labor principles. It established a six-step process to evaluate suppliers: qualification, 
tender, workshops, negotiations, implementation and supplier relationship management. The company 
gives preference to suppliers based on quality and price and those who share the group’s commitment 
to conducting business in an ethically, environmentally and socially responsible manner. It expects 
suppliers to make continuous improvements and to have similar rules for their own suppliers. To 
prioritize resources and achieve maximum impact, the program has a focused approach based on 
high-risk categories. The category guides act as a blueprint for carrying out supplier due-diligence. 
Included among high-risk categories are: trucking/intermodal, warehousing services, terminals, 
shipbuilding yards/drydocks, container manufacturers and manning – seafarers. Specific category 
guides and supplier evaluation questionnaires are available as well.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: The company established the Responsible Procurement 
Programme to promote continuous improvements in its supply chain.  

Some suppliers may be in a better position to easily adopt good business practices in the areas of 
human rights, labor, environment and anticorruption than others. Nevertheless, what is important to 
the group is that suppliers show commitment to including the main principles of the code in their own 
operations and across their supply chains, including environmental principles, in some instances 
geared to GHG emissions reductions.

Impacts/lessons learned: Over a longer period, the practice of evaluating suppliers with the six-step 
process will enable Maersk to rate suppliers across defined risk categories. The group expects 
long-term suppliers to have management systems in place to ensure compliance with the Group 
Third Party Code and to proactively extend these principles within their own supply chain, further 
extending the reach of environmental action.

27

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Braskem – A vertical approach to supplier engagement23

Braskem has adopted a comprehensive and integrated strategy across both its own operations and its 
value chain to address climate change. Recognizing the role that suppliers play in mitigating and 
managing climate risks and opportunities, the company has decided to take a vertical approach to 
engagement. Braskem begins by assessing engagement and awareness levels among its suppliers 
and rates them at different levels. Braskem supports them through targeted workshops, which vary 
depending on their level of engagement. These workshops improve supplier awareness and provide 
them with training and the dissemination of best practices, as well as technical support in identifying 
opportunities to reduce emissions and costs. Furthermore, all suppliers receive feedback on an 
annual basis, allowing them to identify actions for further progress.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: With this approach to supplier engagement, Braskem has 
achieved a voluntary and steady improvement in supplier performance in key areas, such as setting 
up GHG emissions inventories, defining reduction targets, and identifying opportunities and risks 
associated with their business. As a result, Braskem reports nearly 44% of its scope 3 emissions.

Impacts/lessons learned: The Braskem approach to supplier engagement has allowed the company 
to achieve voluntary and steady improvement in supplier performance in key areas. The feedback sent 
to suppliers on an annual basis allows them to identify actions for further progress. Additionally, 
Braskem has been able to start analyzing the opportunities and risks communicated to the company 
by suppliers, which will inform its future engagement strategy. In light of this success, the company 
has subsequently launched the same engagement process targeting suppliers operating in water- 
stressed regions, offering more targeted support for water resource management strategies.

DHL Global Forwarding – GoGreen rating scheme to evaluate air &  

                                ocean freight carriers [*]

The GoGreen carrier rating is an integral part of DHL Global Forwarding’s overall carrier evaluation 
process by which the environmental sustainability of carriers is determined. An above average rating 
is an essential element to obtain “preferred carrier” status by DHL Global Forwarding. Carriers are 
rated along the following four categories: 
•  Sustainable management: sustainability strategy, policies, training and emissions reporting are in place;
•  Transparency: the provision of “credible” carbon efficiency data on different levels of granularity;
•  Carbon efficiency: significant share of DHL volumes needs to be shipped with better than average  

gCO2e per transported kilometer;

•  Sustainable innovation and development: decarbonization strategy, technology and fuel pilots in place.

Carriers are invited to provide qualitative information via a standardized survey. Quantitative data 
(CO2e efficiency) is provided by the individual carrier and matched with the company’s shipment 
profiles and data. After an assessment of the data provided, carriers receive a points-based rating in 
each of the four categories. The evaluation criteria of each category are adjusted yearly to better 
reflect the ever-changing industry status and any possible future development needs. Via a separate 
Evaluation Factsheet, detailed scores and benchmarking are shared with the carrier on a regular 
basis and discussed bilaterally. Carriers are expected to continuously improve their performance and 
strive for maximum scores.

Additionally, carriers are provided with a GoGreen Carrier Certificate recognizing the carrier’s efforts 
and performance once a year in December. If the performance requirements of a category are  
fulfilled, the carrier is awarded with a green aircraft/vessel. 

The case for GHG emissions reductions: Carrier evaluation insights are used to optimize the  
environmental supply chain performance of DHL Global Forwarding’s customers. Carrier and routing 

selection represent important levers for optimizing the carbon efficiency of supply chains. To make an 
informed decision, shippers need transparency across different transport options. Selecting a more 
efficient solution does not necessarily result in higher expenses; however, it can affect lead times and 
air and marine ports of loading and discharge. Most tenders still primarily have a commercial focus 
within a narrower scope. The company therefore recommends analyzing and discussing options to 
reduce emissions in the supply chain beyond the tender process and, ideally, within a holistic scope. 

Impacts/lessons learned: The GoGreen rating scheme provides carriers with a better understanding 
of DHL Global Forwarding’s expectations and how they can contribute to Group Mission 2050 – Zero 
Emissions. At the same time, the rating insights enable DHL Global Forwarding to support shippers 
by helping them optimize the carbon footprint of their own supply chains.

Dow Chemical – Global Emissions Inventory (GEI)24 [*]

Dow has a corporate database called the Global Emissions Inventory (GEI). The emitting businesses 
track and record their emissions in the GEI, the central database that is used as the basis for regional 
and global reports of emissions. Each facility has an environment, health and safety focal point 
responsible for collecting and reporting all waste and emissions data. The GEI tracks Scope 1 GHG 
emissions coming from the manufacturing processes, which include power plants (cogeneration), 
crackers, smelters, flares, etc. Dow’s Scope 2 GHG emissions come from purchased power. Dow’s 
emissions are divided by Scope 1 GHG emissions, 74.5%; and Scope 2 GHG emissions, 25.5%. Dow 
manages the reporting and cost of emissions with the joint objectives of minimizing the cost of 
emissions and maximizing the profitability of the company over the long term. There are two types of 
work performed to achieve these objectives: 
•  The Energy and Climate Change business, led by a global business director and through  regional  
directors and their organizations, both purchases and trades any required allowances for these  
emissions, and considers the cost of carbon in the production and acquisition of steam and power  
for the company. This includes developing long-term projections of the cost of carbon at each of its  
production locations globally;
In addition, the global carbon management director and team are responsible for developing an  
optimized list of projects to reduce carbon emissions and to increase efficiency and to ensure the  
present and future cost of carbon is included in all capital investment and maintenance decisions.

• 

Dow tracks progress in reducing emissions through three specific goals as part of its 2025  
Sustainability Goals:
I)  Dow will obtain 750 MW of its power demand from renewable sources by 2025;
II)  Though Dow will grow globally over the next 10 years, Dow’s absolute greenhouse gas emissions  
  will not exceed the 2006 baseline;
III) Dow will grow but offset emissions of priority compounds, volatile organic compounds and  

nitrogen oxides.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: Dow is well on track to meet these goals. The company has 
long-term contracts to procure clean energy in the United States, Latin America and Europe.  
Approximately 9.5% of purchased electricity is from renewable sources. Similarly, its new plants have 
significantly improved efficiency, enabling them to increase sales significantly with stable emissions.

Impacts/lessons learned: The integrated central management approach for reporting greenhouse 
gas emissions and their cost allows Dow to minimize the cost of emissions while maximizing the 
profitability of the company over the long term.

28

29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ford Motor Company – Applying GEMI’s Quick Guide to Strategic Buyer/ 

                           Supplier Collaboration on Sustainability25

Ford Motor Company has a strategy to reduce the environmental impacts from its operations and is 
working to promote similar commitments with suppliers and across the automotive industry through 
its Partnership for A Cleaner Environment (PACE). PACE enables Ford to share details on best 
practices related to the use of water and energy and on carbon dioxide emissions reductions. Through 
PACE, Ford has already implemented such best practices with 50 of its suppliers. The company asks 
suppliers to create a roadmap to improve their environmental performance, collect baseline environ-
mental data, implement successful practices, measure performance improvements, and share best 
practices. Ford periodically updates and shares best practices among suppliers and its own facilities.

One of the ways Ford engages with its key strategic suppliers is through the Aligned Business 
Framework. This dialogue helps to drive quality and innovation, identify operational synergies and 
encourages collaboration in areas such as ethical business practices, working conditions and 
responsible sourcing. For these suppliers, Ford has established a three-stage process to manage and 
verify compliance with sustainability measures: (i) the supplier has a code of conduct that aligns with 
Ford Policy Letter 24 on Human Rights, Basic Working Conditions, and Corporate Responsibility; 
(ii) the supplier provides internal training to ensure its employees understand and comply with the 
code of conduct and Ford validates the processes to ensure ongoing alignment; (iii) the supplier 
verifies that its own suppliers are compliant with the shared standards and expectations.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: Ford liaises with its suppliers and with wider industry 
partners to reduce the environmental impacts not just of its supply chain but of the automotive 
industry as a whole.

Impacts/lessons learned: To offer value and to reduce its footprint in the long run, Ford is managing 
the impacts of its products across their life cycle.

HEINEKEN – Boosting internal initiatives to achieve supply chain sustainability [*]

The carbon reduction ambition of the company is driven by management and it is cascading to all 
teams by two main initiatives:
•  Linking personal targets to sustainability. All logistics-related buyers have the target to have three 
projects related to sustainability. There are a few standard projects (e.g., increasing the usage of  
telematics by carriers). A local team can identify and do its own projects and the global functions  
have the overview to ensure that they can select best practices that can be considered for  
implementation in other regions as well.

•  Motivating via internal competition. The company has established a Supply Chain Implementation  
  Award, for which different efficiency or sustainability topics are selected every year. The Global  
  Supply Chain department organizes the related events and relevant regional or local teams have  
the opportunity to submit projects that are interesting and impactful. Then the jury selects the  
best submissions, and these are invited to the final competition event where the finalists have  
the opportunity to showcase and present their projects to the other finalists and to the top  
  management (including the CEO). The winning team will have dinner with the top management.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: The personnel is encouraged to undertake initiatives to 
improve supply chain sustainability. These include GHG emissions reductions.

Impacts/lessons learned: The initiatives have motivated the personnel to include sustainability –  
including GHG emissions reductions – in their daily activities, as this impacts their personal targets. 
Furthermore, local teams are motivated via competition. The Supply Chain Implementation Award 
also allows the company to show the commitment of the top management.

IKEA – IWAY Standard on Purchasing Products, Materials and Services26

IWAY is the IKEA code of conduct, first introduced in 2000. It specifies the requirements, including 
some specific to emissions, placed on product and service suppliers and details benefits they can 
expect in return from IKEA. In addition to the main document, there are several industry-specific 
supplements and a special code of conduct for child labor; there is also a specific transport section, 
which details requirements for all services (road, rail, ocean, customer distribution including home 
delivery, shunting, barge and consolidation points) involved in transporting IKEA products. IWAY is 
based on eight core conventions defined in the Fundamental Principles of Rights at Work, the United 
Nations International Labour Organization declaration of June 1998, the Rio Declaration on Sustainable 
Development of 1992, The UN Johannesburg Summit on Sustainable Development and the Ten 
Principles of the UN Global Compact of 2000.

The steps for procuring supplier services are: (i) start-up requirements must be complied with before 
signing a business contract; (ii) the IKEA supplier shall acknowledge and accept the IWAY requirements 
by signing the IWAY Compliance Commitment document; (iii) the IKEA supplier shall appoint one or 
several persons who shall have defined responsibilities and the authority to ensure compliance with 
requirements; (iv) the IKEA supplier shall communicate the IWAY requirements to all workers and 
sub-suppliers and ask the latter to accept it in writing.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: By specifying the requirements for suppliers, with a focus 
on transport, IWAY pushes suppliers to adopt CO2 emissions reductions programs and practical 
actions and/or plans to reduce environmental impacts related to their own facilities.

Impacts/lessons learned: IWAY creates a common approach to procurement for the IKEA Group, 
applying high standards to all services and materials sourced. This includes exploring ways to work 
with circular procurement models to save materials, increasing the share of renewable, recyclable or 
recycled materials in the non-home furnishing range, working with suppliers to ensure compliance 
with the IWAY supplier code of conduct, and developing a sustainable approach for food, including 
animal welfare standards. It sets specific requirements for ocean transport, land transport and 
consolidation points; suppliers have to update and submit related surveys to IKEA annually.

Johnson & Johnson – Using sustainability to strengthen carrier relationships27 

The Johnson & Johnson logistics operation in North America has a long track record of attracting 
carriers that share the company’s commitment to customer service, efficiency and sustainable 
transportation. This includes the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (US EPA)  
SmartWay  Transport Partnership, a public-private initiative between the EPA and the freight  
transportation industry aimed at improving efficiency and sustainability. Johnson & Johnson has 
been a SmartWay partner since 2005 and works exclusively with freight carriers that participate  
in the program.

Johnson & Johnson has several initiatives to back up that commitment:
•  The logistics incentive order program incentivizes customers to place orders in quantities that  

legally optimize space use on trailers, which reduces the number of deliveries and makes it more  
efficient to schedule, load and unload goods. These financial and service-oriented incentives are  
available to all customers that meet a certain order and volume threshold. Furthermore, the  
company also promotes reductions in idle time and faster turnaround times at distribution centers  
by scheduling deliveries, allowing dropped trailers and, where available, offering shore-power  
electrical connections for trucks. 

30

31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Dedicated trucks operate as a regional fleet for a distribution center in the northeastern US.  
The company has precisely matched its truck specifications to the characteristics of the load,  
using day cabs instead of sleepers. 

•  A modal shift in North America has allowed the company to shift approximately 700 shipments on five  
lanes from truckload to intermodal transport; and in 2017 it improved intermodal use from 69% to 78%.
•  The exclusive use of 50 SmartWay carriers in its North American logistics operations ensures that  

the company measures, benchmarks and shares fuel use and emissions.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: The optimization of deliveries, the use of trucks, promoting 
modal shifts and the use of carriers that are able to measure their performance have allowed John-
son & Johnson to double its miles-per-gallon fuel savings throughout its logistics operations in North 
America. Consequently, GHG emissions from the Johnson & Johnson supply chain have decreased.

Impacts/lessons learned: 
•  The financial and service-oriented incentives enable customers to improve truck space use and  

reduce the number of deliveries.

•  The use of dedicated trucks matched with specific loads had allowed savings of about 5,000  

pounds of tare weight per truck and another four to five pallets of payload per trip compared to the  
tractor-trailers the company used previously.

•  The mode-shifting initiative has doubled miles-per-gallon fuel savings (6.3 miles per gallon for  
truckload vs. 12 miles per gallon for intermodal), removed 420 trucks from the road, and kept  
truckload capacity free for other lanes.

•  The exclusive use of SmartWay carriers gives Johnson & Johnson the possibility to evaluate  
carriers’ performance. Furthermore, it gives the company opportunities to collaborate with  
carriers and customers on more efficient and sustainable transportation practices.

Multinational Shippers (China) – Smart Transport Manager Training30 

Four Multinational Shippers (IKEA, Heineken, H&M and Walmart) in China defined their long-term 
sustainability strategy to include GHG emissions reductions throughout the entire supply chain.  
They requested that the transport managers from several of their key carriers attend Smart  
Transport Manager Training. Carriers’ transport managers play key roles in the operations of road 
freight operators as they look after the operation’s resources and are responsible for safety, compliance 
and customer service, as well as for maximizing resource use and reducing operating costs. 

Smart Transport Manager Training, a training course offered by the SFC, equips transport managers 
with the skills and expertise they need to develop a robust, credible and effective action plan to increase 
fleet fuel efficiency. The action plan is based on the five principles of efficient truck fleet management: 
1.  Fuel management – managing your fuel use;
2.  Driver and staff skills – develop skills and motivate drivers and staff;
3.  Vehicles and maintenance – optimize vehicle specifications, operations and maintenance;
4.  Performance monitoring – continuously monitor and improve your truck fleet’s performance;
5.  Information technology – use the right information technology efficiently.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: By raising awareness of the holistic approach to fleet fuel 
efficiency, carriers typically reduce fuel consumption by a minimum of 5% per tonne kilometer, which 
reduces the carrier’s Scope 1 GHG emissions and the shipper’s Scope 3 emissions. 

Impacts/lessons learned: Trained transport managers who prepare an action plan during the Smart 
Transport Manager Training will start implementing it by themselves or seek follow up support to 
work on specific activities, such as eco-driver training or implementing new technologies.

Jumbo – Collaboration between retailer, product suppliers and LSPs29

Nike’s Sustainable Manufacturing & Sourcing Index31 

In 2015, Dutch retailer giant Jumbo, five product suppliers (SCA Hygiene, Heinz, FrieslandCampina, 
Hero Benelux and Refresco) and logistics service provider Nabuurs decided to focus on CO2 reductions 
and a more responsive supply chain as a common goal. They understood the everyday challenge that 
Jumbo was facing when getting products to shops and consumers across the Netherlands using 
hundreds of carriers. Suppliers transported products from different brands separately to Jumbo's 
distribution center in Woerden, only for trucks to then return empty. The five product suppliers  
and Nabuurs arranged to bundle orders for Jumbo in shared trucks and avoid empty running on 
freight backhauls. 

The case for GHG emissions reductions: Their actions paid off: 40% fewer supplies stacked at  
the distribution center; 40% fewer deliveries; 30% higher truck load factors; 35% fewer transport 
kilometers; and 35% lower carbon footprint. This has translated into cost savings for all partners. 
While these have not been the same for each, everyone has benefitted in some way, at the very least 
by contributing to a greener and more responsive supply chain and being able to position themselves 
as a supply chain partner striving for excellence in logistics.

Impacts/lessons learned: Logistics supply chains involve several stakeholders. Collaboration among 
them is key to accelerating the decarbonization of the sector.

Part of Nike’s growth strategy is to seek partners who are developing agile and resilient management 
systems to drive sustainable business growth by minimizing their environmental impacts, fostering  
a strong culture of safety and developing an engaged and valued workforce. In 2012, Nike launched  
its Sustainable Manufacturing and Sourcing Index, a system combining factory ratings for lean 
manufacturing and human resource management, and health, safety and the environment. Nike’s 
sourcing strategy prioritizes and favors suppliers who show demonstrable leadership in corporate 
responsibility and sustainability and who seek to move beyond minimum sustainability standards.

Nike measures contract factory performance through the index and works only with factories  
achieving at least the bronze level. Reaching a bronze rating demonstrates baseline factory  
compliance with Nike’s Code of Conduct and Code Leadership Standards, which the company  
designed to respect the rights of workers and create a safe working environment. 

Nike monitors and audits supplier compliance (for finished goods) through its Factory Compliance 
Ownership Program, which is based on the company’s Code of Conduct and Code Leadership Standards. 
Internal and accredited third parties, including the Fair Labor Association (a neutral industry body) 
and assessments by Better Work – a joint initiative of the United Nations International Labor Organization 
and the International Finance Corporation, a member of the World Bank Group – conduct regular 
announced and unannounced audits. Suppliers with higher compliance ratings receive contractual 
preference. When a supplier does not reach the bronze rating, Nike works with factory managers to 
ensure that they take corrective actions. A supplier that fails to remedy the issues identified is subject 
to review and sanctions, including potential termination of the supply agreement. As a requirement 
for working with Nike, factories must comply with Nike’s Code of Conduct and Code Leadership 
Standards, which align with International Labor Organization standards. 

32

33

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The case for GHG emissions reductions: Nike seeks partners with management systems that enable 
them to minimize the environmental impact of their activities. Nike’s Sustainable Manufacturing and 
Sourcing Index allows it to rate suppliers according to their level of commitment to corporate respon-
sibility and sustainable practices, giving precedence in contract decisions to those that would result 
in decreased emissions.

Impacts/lessons learned: The Sustainable Manufacturing and Sourcing Index gives environmental 
and human resource management performance equal weight alongside business metrics in Nike 
sourcing, increases transparency to reduce non-compliant practices, and creates targets and 
incentives for suppliers to go well beyond compliance.

Philips – Case from SPLC Guidance for Leadership in Sustainable Purchasing32 

Philips invests in improving operations and achieving its sustainability goals with innovative strategies 
that require a new way of doing business, moving away from the traditional linear economy towards  
a holistic and circular one. In 2015, the company’s Procurement and Sustainability groups worked 
together to develop a strategy to achieve carbon neutrality, a commitment the company made as part 
of the 21st Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
The strategy includes energy efficiency initiatives, the deployment of onsite renewable resources, the 
purchase of renewable energy credits, and the purchase of a long-term power purchase agreement. 
Philips undertook the process to develop its cross-functional strategy to carbon neutrality, along with 
an analysis of power purchase agreement benefits and the business case.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: The strategy includes energy efficiency initiatives, the 
deployment of onsite renewable resources, the purchase of renewable energy credits, and the 
establishment of a long-term power purchase agreement, which will allow the company to achieve 
carbon-neutral operations in the US and reduce its global carbon footprint by 8.3%. 

Impacts/lessons learned: Already a leader in sustainability, the Philips power purchase agreement 
has helped the company take a leap forward in reducing the impact of its North American operations. 
Though not specific to transport and Scope 3 emissions, the company’s cross-functional carbon 
reduction strategy is a good example.

•  The use of dedicated trucks matched with specific loads had allowed savings of about 5,000  

pounds of tare weight per truck and another four to five pallets of payload per trip compared to  
the tractor-trailers the company used previously.

•  The mode-shifting initiative has doubled miles-per-gallon fuel savings (6.3 miles per gallon for  
truckload vs. 12 miles per gallon for intermodal), removed 420 trucks from the road, and kept  
truckload capacity free for other lanes.

•  The exclusive use of SmartWay carriers gives Johnson & Johnson the possibility to evaluate  
carriers’ performance. Furthermore, it gives the company opportunities to collaborate with  
carriers and customers on more efficient and sustainable transportation practices.

Port of Rotterdam – Discounts on port dues for sustainable vessels33 [*] 

The Port of Rotterdam Authority offers several discount options on port dues. Vessels that regularly 
visit the Port of Rotterdam or handle a large amount of cargo are rewarded, but sustainable vessels 
are eligible for a specific incentive scheme. In particular, the following discounts on port dues may 
apply to sustainable vessels:34 

•  Seagoing LNG tankers, chemicals/gas tankers and oil/product tankers provided with a Green  
  Award Certificate qualify for a 15% discount on port dues related to gross tonnage size. The Green  
  Award35 is a voluntary quality assessment certification scheme; the certificate is issued by the  

independent Green Award Foundation to vessels and shipping companies that have made additional  
investments in the vessel and crew in order to improve environmental performance, safety and  
quality. The Green Award system also applies to a wide range of inland vessels. Certification is  
based on the environmental performance of the engines, various other energy saving equipment,  
environmental management and safety. Inland vessels with a Green Award certificate qualify for  
a discount of up to 100% on port dues.

•  Seagoing Vessels that score 31.0 points or more on the Environmental Ship Index (ESI),36 as 

administrated by the International Association of Ports and Harbors (IAPH)37 qualify for a 10%  
discount on port dues related to gross tonnage size already paid. If the vessel also has an individual  

  ESI nitrogen oxide score of 31.0 points or more, the discount will be doubled. The ESI identifies  

seagoing ships that perform better in reducing air emissions than required by the current emissions  
standards of the International Maritime Organization; in particular, it evaluates the amount of  
nitrogen oxide and sulphur oxide that is emitted by a ship and includes a reporting scheme on the  
greenhouse gas emission of the ship. 

The case for GHG emissions reductions: Both the Green Award certificate and the ESI act as indica-
tors of the environmental performance of vessels. They are quality marks and can bring benefits to 
their holders. The Port of Rotterdam Authority rewards vessels that hold the certificate and/or have a 
good ESI indicator, thereby encouraging more sustainable behavior in the shipping industry.

Impacts/lessons learned: The discount scheme used by the Port of Rotterdam allows the rewarding 
of ships that have a reduced environmental impact and enables the promotion of cleaner ships. Both 
the Green Award certificate and the ESI score can also be used by shippers and ship owners as their 
own promotional instrument. 

Schneider38 – How to create an effective transportation RFP39

A request for proposal (RFP) is the formal call for a carrier to answer a shipper’s business needs 
once the shipper has chosen a select group to consider for hire. Carriers’ completed proposals 
provide the opportunity to compare information on a level basis across all submissions. During the 
process, shippers can narrow down potential carriers to hire to those who will best execute the work. 
Before compiling the necessary questions and statistics to create an RFP, the shipper makes decisions 
for components that will affect the final proposal and impact how a carrier crafts its response:
•  Determine the number of bid rounds;
• 
•  Decide the bid/price duration – best practice is a two-year bid term with annual escalation;
• 

If packaging or bundling lanes, determine in advance how to evaluate this in the bid process;

If splitting bids, implement annual price-adjustment processes for the freight on which your  
carriers are about to bid;

•  Establish whether to adjust bid rates to value incumbency.

After making these decisions, the shipper can create the RFP. In order to allow carriers to provide the 
most accurate and comprehensive overview of their capabilities, the RFP should ask for both qualitative 
and quantitative information: 
•  Qualitative, to allow carriers to report the details of their expertise and business, often in  

fill-in-the-blank or short-answer formats. Guidelines:
I)  Create clear, streamlined questions and avoid repetition;
II) 

Include adequate space for respondents to provide context or add additional information to a  
numerical answer – numbers do not always tell a complete story;

III)  Format the RFP so that the carrier provides accurate scores and data – outdated formats may  

inhibit the correct reporting of data;

34

35

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV)  Limit financial questions, as most carriers are unable to answer them due to privacy  

restrictions;
Consider creating the RFP in Excel for easy data input and tracking.

V) 

•  Quantitative, aiming to provide as many details as possible in order to enable the carriers to  

prepare an accurate proposal. Guidelines are:
I) 

Pay attention to the details, as the shipper needs to see a clear and accurate picture of the  
carrier’s capabilities. The carrier’s expertise in the industry, portfolio of services,  
cultural fit, network and technology use are just a few components to help shippers  
make the right choice;
Provide details regarding origin-destination pairings (ZIP/postal codes, states/provinces,  
regions, freight volume between destination points on each lane;
Include detailed freight characteristics (e.g., drop and hook);

III) 
IV)  Describe any seasonality/variability and take into account whether there will first be  

II) 

negotiations with incumbents or if it will be a one-bid round, with key lane negotiations  
among incumbents;
List any ancillary requirements (e.g., top-off, trailer detention);
Identify who is the shipper and who is the consignee;
Include bid-to-implementation duration and objectives between the shipper and carrier;

V) 
VI) 
VII) 
VIII)  Be prepared to select 2 to 5 alternative carriers as a backup to the primary carrier;
IX)  Consider creating the RFP in Excel for easy and consistent data input and tracking.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: Reliable and complete upfront information provided in the 
RFP can help the carrier determine whether the potential business will be the correct fit, mitigating 
the risk of winning the business and later realizing it is not the right opportunity and/or operating it 
inefficiently. Inefficiencies in the supply chain exercise can have a negative impact on GHG emissions 
(e.g., unoptimized deliveries, increased number of needed trips, inefficient use of trucks).

Impacts/lessons learned: To get the most accurate and effective bid from carriers, it is important to 
have a user-friendly and informative RFP. Thoroughly creating and detailing the RFP at the onset of 
the process will save shippers time once the carriers return the proposals for consideration. With 
clear expectations set up front, it will be easier to both eliminate carriers who do not meet the basic 
requirements of the RFP and spot the ones that are indeed viable candidates.

Home Depot – Supply chain restructuring, bidding process rethinking,  

         carrier rating, collaboration40

Home Depot, a home improvement supplies retailing company41 based in the United States (US), 
favors a balance between performance and cost when selecting carriers. For the past several years, 
the company has been revising its approach to the supply chain to better support its retail operations, 
with three main actions:
•  Centralized supply chain: More than 10 years ago, the company took transportation responsibilities  
away from regional offices and centralized them at Home Depot’s headquarters in Atlanta, Canada  
and Mexico. Prior to centralization, 30% of Home Depot’s freight went through the distribution  
supply chain and 70% went direct to stores; centralization has led to a reversal in those numbers.  
In the US, Home Depot operates over 60 distribution centers across the country.42 Moving products  
between those distribution centers and more than 2,000 US locations requires Home Depot to use  

  multiple forms of transportation: Home Depot does not own its own trucks, but each distribution  

center has a dedicated fleet run by dedicated carriers on three-year contracts. Likewise, it puts its  
less-than-truckload (LTL) contracts out for bidding every two years. The length of those contracts  
and the way Home Depot is managing its national trucking and intermodal bids for over-the-road  
(OTR) shipping is changing the relationship between carrier and customer.

•  Rethinking the bidding process: In 2009, during the recession, declining retail sales slowed activity  
along transportation lines. As trucking companies had an abundance of capacity and few expiring  
contracts, Home Depot began to aggressively bid out its trucking rates against the evergreen  
prices carriers had long held. Carriers needed work and accepted the new, lower rates, but when  
the economy began rebounding in 2010 those carriers came back to Home Depot looking to raise  
prices even though the new contracts were still in place. Home Depot held firm at first, but soon  
its tender (load) acceptance began to go down: therefore, the rate per mile increased because  
carriers were not accepting Home Depot’s loads, causing many of those loads to move at spot  
rates. Home Depot responded by quickly adjusting rates for carriers, but the experience made the  
retailer realize it needed a more standardized process for setting OTR shipping costs. In 2011,  
  Home Depot held its first national bid for a one-year OTR shipping contract. For the past five years,  
  Home Depot has rebid approximately 80% of its expiring OTR trucking and intermodal contracts.  
Incumbent carriers retained the 20% not bid at a neutral rate. This practice allows strong performing  
carriers to hold on to lanes that are critical parts of their network. Home Depot typically favors  
asset-owning carriers because it wants to spend money on companies that are investing in their  
own trucks and drivers: asset-owning carriers handle more than 95% of Home Depot’s overall  

  OTR shipping.
•  Rating carriers: In order to have a strong understanding of how each transportation partner and  
how the network as a whole have performed, Home Depot has developed the Carrier Rack and  

  Stack program, a scorecard that rates the performance of all the carriers in its network. The  
company shares those scorecards with carriers on a weekly basis, showing how the carrier  
performed that week, in four-week, twelve-week and year-to-date periods against all other  
transportation providers in the network. Home Depot factors that annual performance into the  
following year’s bid to choose transportation providers. Based on where the carriers rank, Home  

  Depot artificially inflates the carrier’s rates entered into the biding tool. The reasoning is that a  
low-performing carrier will actually cost more than a top performing one and accounting for  
carrier service in the bid helps Home Depot determine the true cost of its contracted rates.  
The end-process rewards carriers based on a combination of performance, rates and a carrier’s  
  SmartWay ranking, which encourages the carriers to reduce emissions and support the environment.  
  Home Depot also uses the scorecards to make service adjustments based on quarterly  

performance reviews.

Furthermore, Home Depot has recognized the importance of collaboration along the supply chain. 
After transforming how it approaches its transportation contracts, it continues to work with carriers 
to improve efficiency in its supply chain and capacity by employing supply chain synchronization 
where freight orders coincide with selling store patterns. This synchronization results in steadier 
week-over-week shipping and reduces lead times. 

Home Depot is conscious of the difficult work/life balance many truckers experience and is responding 
by improving efficiencies across its carrier base. This leads to happy drivers who want to run loads for 
the company. The goal of those efforts is for drivers to make Home Depot a higher priority in shipping. 

The case for GHG emissions reductions: The general restructuring of the supply chain and the bidding 
process, and the consequent introduction of the carrier rating system, have allowed the company to 
acquire better knowledge and control of its supply chain. The influence of the new carrier rating system 
in the selection process allows for the rewarding of carriers based on a combination of performance, 
rates and its SmartWay ranking, a United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) rating that 
encourages transportation companies to reduce emissions and support the environment.

Impacts/lessons learned: 
•  The length of the contracts with shippers and the way Home Depot is managing its national trucking  
and intermodal bids for OTR shipping is changing the relationship between carrierand customer.
•  Home Depot has set up a more standardized process for setting OTR shipping costs, holding  

national bids for a one-year OTR shipping contract.

36

37

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Rebidding all of the national carrier contracts each year requires a strong understanding of how  

each transportation partner and the network as a whole have performed. A carrier rating system  
facilitates this process and makes the selection of best performing carriers easier, including those  
committed to emissions reductions.

takes measures to reduce the carbon footprint of the project that is awarded to the company by means of 
the CO2 Performance Ladder. The company remains in dialogue with the water authority to ensure 
effective CO2 reduction measures are taken. Both Van der Stelt and the commissioning party are 
investigating various measures to keep the carbon emissions of this project at a minimum.

•  The 12-month bid process allows Home Depot and its carriers to reset based on market conditions  
and network changes. The process has also encouraged carriers to follow through with their  
commitments: once the new lanes and rates are set, Home Depot sustains approximately 98% of  
the volume locked-in during the following 12 months. Further, resetting those contracts annually  
gives Home Depot an opportunity to adjust its lanes and commitment levels to improve capacity. 

Unilever – Responsible Sourcing Policy43 [*]

Unilever’s Responsible Sourcing Policy (RSP) aims to enable Unilever to work together with suppliers to 
establish sustainable supply chains. This ambition is also at the core of the Unilever Sustainable Living 
Plan (USLP), based on 12 fundamental principles anchored in internationally recognized standards (i.e., 
UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights; International Bill of Human Rights; International 
Labor Organization’s Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at work).

The RSP includes a set of mandatory requirements that all the suppliers need to meet in order to  
be able to do business with Unilever. RSP supports the implementation of the Unilever Supplier 
Qualification System (USQS44) for all suppliers of products and services to Unilever. When invited to 
register in USQS, suppliers are assessed against the principles detailed in the RSP. Unilever verifies 
alignment with and the implementation of the policy’s mandatory requirements through the use of 
supplier self-declaration, online assessments and – for designated high-risk countries and supplier 
types – independent verification including third-party audits. A three-step process is established: 
implementing mandatory requirements relevant to the fundamental principles and applying to all the 
suppliers in a Unilever supply chain; advancing to good practice; achieving and maintaining best 
practices. Suppliers are also encouraged to move from the mandatory requirements to best practices.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: The RSP embodies the way that Unilever seeks to operate in 
addition to the standards it expects of its suppliers. This can also be used to push GHG emissions 
reductions along the supply chain.

Impacts/lessons learned: The policy reinforces Unilever’s commitment to working together with 
suppliers to ensure that the business objectives are delivered while making a positive social impact 
on supply chains and reducing environmental impacts and GHG emissions.

Van der Stelt – The CO2 Performance Ladder45 [*]

Van der Stelt is a Dutch freight transportation company with a fleet of 45 trucks that has the ambition to 
continuously develop its sustainability and CO2 reductions. For this, the organization is certified on the 
CO2 Performance Ladder.46 Through the award advantage provided by the CO2 Performance Ladder, Van 
der Stelt won the tender for a project consisting of the transportation of sediment for one of the Dutch 
water authorities, Hoogheemraadschap Hollands Noorderkwartier. The water authority presented a 
tender for this project in 2015 in which it used the CO2 Performance Ladder as a procurement instrument. 
To register in this tender, Van der Stelt set itsCO2 ambition level to 3; the company did not have a certificate 
on the CO2 Performance Ladder at the time. When Van der Stelt was awarded the contract, it needed to 
prove that it complied with the CO2 Performance Ladder level 3 within a year, which it did. Van der Stelt 

The case for GHG emissions reductions: In addition to the implementation of CO2 reduction measures 
in its projects, Van der Stelt also takes measures to cut back carbon emissions within the organization. 
Examples of the measures taken are the use of LED lighting, the installation of solar panels, as well 
as stimulating behavioral change, such as efficient driving measures to save fuel. In order to stimulate 
behavioral change, the company arranges training for its drivers to become more aware of the 
consequences of carbon emissions in the atmosphere and how to drive more efficiently. These 
measures led to carbon savings of 2.6% in 2017. The company has the goal to reduce its carbon 
emissions by 15% in the period 2015 to 2020. To achieve this objective, Van der Stelt is looking into 
alternative fuels such as hydrotreated vegetable oil (HVO) and hydrogen fuel. The use of alternative 
fuels will help the company cut most of its carbon emissions, because 97% of the CO2 resulting from 
its activities are caused by diesel. Moreover, the transportation company is looking for ways to reduce 
CO2 emissions during the loading and unloading of the goods during transportation.

Impacts/lessons learned: Thanks to the Ladder, Van der Stelt has now has a control mechanism for 
its ambitions to structurally reduce CO2 and the company is becoming more and more aware of 
carbon emissions within its operations and within its projects. In addition, the CO2 Performance 
Ladder contributes to the relevance of discussions to reduce CO2. With this, the importance of carbon 
emissions reduction is spread throughout the entire organization.

Walmart – Ambitious fleet efficiency targets result in considerable savings

In 2005, Walmart committed to a momentous goal: doubling the efficiency of its fleet by the end of 2015. 
Walmart achieved such impressive results in part by collaborating with associates to establish more 
efficient techniques for loading, routing and driving, as well as through collaboration with tractor-trailer 
manufacturers on new technologies. 

The case for GHG emissions reductions: Its year-end results showed a 102.2% improvement in efficiency 
over its 2005 baseline, with associated savings of nearly USD $1 billion annually and avoided emissions 
of almost 650,000 metric tons of CO2.47

Impacts/lessons learned: Collaboration with supply chain partners to optimize operations and to 
incorporate improvements in equipment and technologies is fundamental to achieving efficiency goals.

38

39

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.3  Examples applicable to many companies

Applicable to many companies – FreightShare Lab’s asset sharing platform48 

Optimizing asset use is one of few decarbonization measures in the logistics sector that closely aligns 
with good business practice and offers low-carbon mitigation costs.49 FreightShare Lab is developing an 
advanced platform to improve asset use and reduce the number of freight transport vehicles on the 
road. The objective is to create “the” platform of platforms where companies can share loading spaces 
within a common service provider, thus potentially optimizing every journey and avoiding empty running. 
The heart of the platform is the optimization algorithm developed by Route Monkey, which can reduce 
total fleet mileage by up to 20% and increase productivity by up to 30%. An estimation with real data 
shows that one fleet of 1,500 vehicles could increase deliveries per vehicle by one-third after using the 
advanced platform. The enhancement of the algorithm could effectively collate vehicles, depots and 
other assets from multiple companies, treating them as if they were one fleet. In this way, it can further 
reduce empty-running of trucks and vans, reduce the number of vehicles operating in congested urban 
areas, and therefore substantially cut costs and emissions.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: The Low-Carbon Technology Partnerships initiative’s (LCTPi) 
2017 annual report found among its key outcomes that “modest asset sharing models that can save 15% 
[in emissions and mileage] are only being used by 20% of operators, while highly integrated vehicle and 
depot sharing can lead to a 20% [emissions and mileage] savings and is yet to be taken up in the case of 
at least 85% of commercial vehicle miles.”50 FreightShare Lab’s dynamic data and asset sharing plat-
form can enable route and load optimization/consolidation while simultaneously providing development 
opportunities to small and medium-sized enterprises. The result is a potential reduction in costs and 
emissions across fleets of approximately 20%.

Impacts/lessons learned: Freight and logistics operations are notoriously difficult to decarbonize. 
Smart solutions like an asset sharing platform can accelerate emissions reductions and enhance the 
sector’s efficiency so that there are fewer vehicles carrying the same, or greater, volumes of goods.  
This collaboration among stakeholders encourages them to consolidate their cargo, resulting in an 
optimized load factor, a reduction in fleet mileage, and an increase in productivity.

Applicable to many companies – Shippers and LSPs using SmartWay data to 
inform transportation purchasing decisions54 

SmartWay55 is the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) program aiming to help companies 
advance supply chain sustainability by providing the transportation industry with tools to measure, benchmark 
and take action to reduce GHG emissions and improve fuel efficiency. Partnering with SmartWay allows 
shippers and LSPs to equip themselves with actionable data and, in turn, use that information to help 
further inform customers' buying decisions and improve freight sustainability. Initially, SmartWay focused 
on gathering data from shippers, carriers and LSPs on factors such as tractor age and emissions, miles per 
gallon, distance travelled, and trailer load weights. Specific, defined transportation emissions data, controls 
and operational targets are necessary to drive emissions reporting and meet sustainability goals. Measure- 
ment is the first step in applying the value of the derived data to reach identified targets. The newest 
generation of SmartWay allows shippers and third-party logistics providers to evaluate and incorporate 
environmental data and use it to make educated, meaningful and valuable business decisions. SmartWay 
compiles information into a standardized, transparent format for reporting carbon footprint data. This allows 
comparison among carriers' emission profiles and their use as a decision-making factor in procurement.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: Shippers and LPSs can incorporate environmental performance 
data into purchasing decisions. For example, carriers in all transport modes can have specific CO2, nitrogen 
oxide and particulate matter emissions factors for their operating fleets. These advancements in fleet-specific 
emissions factors create measurable ways to incorporate environmental performance into the procurement 
process. When reducing environmental impact, shippers and LSPs often look first at direct emissions or 
those they can control. Over time, they can improve these impacts and extend their focus to reducing the 
indirect emissions that result from global supply chain operations. In the future, shippers and LSPs will not 
only use SmartWay data as a decision point when purchasing services; they will also come to expect its 
availability and disclosure.

Impacts/lessons learned: Shippers and LSPs have information on their GHG emissions and use it in the 
decision-making process. Actively participating in these programs brings value directly to shippers, 
carriers and LSPs by creating efficiency opportunities, new avenues to advance shipper sustainability 
initiatives and, ultimately, new ways to improve global freight sustainability.

Applicable to many companies – GLEC Declaration51 

Applicable to many companies – SmartWay’s RFP specification56 

Over the years, many company managers have complained that none of their transport providers 
provide data in the same format or that none of their customers ask for information in the same  
way. This leads to wasted efforts in processing and reporting logistics performance data in response 
to different requests. The Global Logistics Emissions Council’s GLEC52 Declaration is a harmonized 
template, customized to each target audience, that companies and organizations can use to report 
GHG emissions to different users/stakeholders. Indeed, it builds on a menu of data/information  
on logistics emissions that organizations can include in their report/GLEC Declaration. GLEC  
developed the Declaration in consultation with businesses, starting with a selection of GLEC  
member companies and then with the wider GLEC community, including additional companies as  
well as green freight programs, NGOs and policy-makers, as well as the European Commission  
and LEARN53 partners.

The case for GHG emissions reductions: The use of a standardized reporting template to report GHG 
emissions publicly and to customers could make better data available, enabling the underpinning of 
European Commission policy and tracking of logistics emission across the European Union against 
targets. Furthermore, it means companies can have better data to underpin corporate targets and 
support decision-making. The GLEC Declaration can help businesses streamline efforts to better 
understand results, lower costs and allow greater focus on emissions reductions.

Impacts/lessons learned: The main reason to implement the GLEC Declaration is to achieve greater 
harmonization in the disclosure of data/information and to increase transparency at different levels 
(e.g., overall company, by region, by customer, per shipment).

The SmartWay Transport Partnership is a voluntary collaboration between the United States Environmental 
Protection Agency (US EPA) and the freight industry designed to increase energy efficiency while significantly 
reducing greenhouse gases and air pollution. The program gives some suggestions on the proper wording 
to adopt in preparing (the shipper) and answering (the carrier) RFPs.
•  Suggested RFP specification: “Vendors awarded this contract will be required to be an EPA SmartWay  
  Transport Shipper Partner and commit to shipping at least 50% of goods using an EPA SmartWay  
  Transport Carrier Partners.”
•  Suggested RFP questions: “Preference will be for suppliers who are an EPA SmartWay Transport  
  Shipper Partner and commit to shipping at least 50% of their goods using EPA SmartWay Transport  
  Carrier Partners. For a list of Partners, see http://www3.epa.gov/smartway/about/partnerlists.htm.

I)  Is your company an EPA SmartWay Transport Shipper Partner? (Yes/No) Prefer YES a. If yes, have you  
  committed to ship or receive 50% or more of your freight using SmartWay registered carriers? (Yes/No) 
II) If you have a private fleet of trucks, is your company a registered EPA SmartWay Transport Carrier  
  Partner? (Yes/No) a. If yes, what bin number are you in (1, 2, 3, 4 or 5) for CO2 g/mile and g/ton-mile?” 

The case for GHG emissions reductions: SmartWay transport partners are leading the way in achieving a cleaner, 
more efficient transportation future by adopting fuel-saving strategies that increase profits and reduce emissions. 

Impacts/lessons learned: Companies that achieve environmental goals through procurement and 
contracting strategies built on the success of US government environmental purchasing programs can 
benefit from the same services that federal, state and local governments require of their suppliers. All 
suggested strategies are adapted from RFP and contract language used by US state and federal agencies. 

40

41

 
 
 
 
Annexes

A.  Smart Freight Leadership

Climate change continues to climb the global agenda, driven by momentum from the Paris Agreement and the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals.  Within  in  the  framework  of  the  Paris  Agreement,  governments  have 
developed / are developing Nationally Determined Contributions that embody efforts to reduce emissions and 
adapt to the impacts of climate change. 

In parallel, businesses are strengthening their strategies to reduce their carbon footprint. What is currently 
lacking  is  a  global  and  unified  strategy  for  heavy  transport  covering  air,  sea,  and  land  and  transshipment 
centers. This would both strengthen efforts between businesses and enable corporations to collaborate with 
governments directly, planning for and achieving compliance with Nationally Determined Contributions.

Smart Freight Centre (SFC) simplifies the pathway for companies to report emissions, implement solutions 
to reduce emissions, and collaborate and advocate for uptake and recognizes that leaders must come forward, 
inspire others and set industry norms. Smart Freight Centre calls this Smart Freight Leadership. 

Figure  3  summarizes  the  Smart  Freight  Leadership  concept,  illustrating  actions  companies  can  take  to 
become Smart Freight Leaders and the support offered by the SFC to help them achieve such recognition.

Figure 3: Smart Freight Leadership chart

Smart Freight Leadership

What companies 
do across their 
global logistics 
supply chain

Report
credible emissions
and set science-based
reduction targets

1

Smart Freight 

GLEC

How Smart 
Freight Centre 
supports 
companies

• GLEC Framework
• SBTI target setting  
   guidelines
• Accreditation of 
   programs and tools

2

3

Implement
solutions as buyer 
and/or supplier that 
reduce emissions

 Solutions

• Smart Freight  
   Procurement 
   Guidelines
• Smart Transport  
   Manager Training

Collaborate
and advocate  
for sector-wide  
uptake

 Collaborate

• Advocacy with 
    influencers
• Recognition of leaders
• Smart Freight  
   Initiatives Map
• Smart Freight  
    workshops

Smart Freight Centre recognizes companies that calculate and report logistics GHG emissions using the Global 
Logistics Council’s GLEC Framework and demonstrate leadership globally by making progress on one or more of 
the other smart freight leadership behaviors. Visit SFC’s website or contact SFC for further information and for 
up-to-date news on Smart Freight Leadership,. 

SFP Guidelines role
The Smart Freight Leadership (SFL) concept supports the SFP Guidelines as one possible solution that supply 
chain buyers (and consequently suppliers) can implement to reduce logistics GHG emissions. The SFP Guidelines 
have  the  mission  of  providing  guidance  to  ensure  that  companies  can  leverage  their  transport  and  logistics 
procurement to achieve GHG emissions reductions.

Both the SFL concept and SFP Guidelines aim to enable companies to move in the same direction. Three guiding 
principles  –  transparency,  collaboration,  leadership  and  innovation  –  are  the  cornerstones  of  the  SFP  Guidelines  
(see section 1.6). Such principles are consistent with the SFL concept shown in Figure 3 as the SFP Guidelines provide 
companies with instructions on how to embed a low-carbon approach in companies’ freight and logistics services 
procurement processes, along with reference material including examples and sources to illustrate efforts. 

B.  Sector initiatives 

By joining forces in a sector initiative, organizations can address the urgent, systemic challenges that are 
difficult  to  tackle  alone.  Members  of  a  sector  initiative  bring  their  expertise  and  perspective  together  in  a 
common approach that enhances the best potential in the industry.

Most industries manage complex value chains and a deeply structured supplier base. As supply chains are 
global,  it  is  necessary  to  promote  the  standardization  and  harmonization  of  supply  chain  approaches  to 
achieve long-term impact. It is also important that companies active in a sector send a common message 
about their sustainability activities and requirements to their providers across the supply chain, including for 
GHG emissions and air pollutant reductions. 

By joining a sector initiative, organizations show suppliers, other partners and stakeholders that they hold  
a common and unified position and understanding of and commitment to supply chain sustainability, while 
maintaining independent supply chain management. Furthermore, they can develop and apply common tools 
to  drive  change  and  have  a  positive  impact  on  sustainability,  including  in  their  supply  chains  and  its 
environmental footprint.

Sector initiatives can strive to embed sustainability topics, in particular GHG emissions reductions, into the 
procurement  processes  of  companies  in  a  targeted  sector.  When  shippers  have  a  common  approach  to 
sustainability, it also benefits suppliers who clearly understand what the companies’ specific sector expects 
from them. 

Sector initiative reference table
The  following  table  summarizes  the  main  sector  initiatives  that  can  be  useful  for  company  procurement 
teams that are aiming to embed sustainability and GHG emissions and air pollutant reductions in their freight 
and logistics services procurement process. We may enrich the list of sector initiatives in the future.

Table 3: Sector initiatives reference table

#  Name  

Sector 

Tools

1

CDP’s supply chain program

Cross-industry

• Standardized reporting platform
• Scope 3 reporting emissions data into  
  their scope 3 inventory
• Analytics products to benchmark and 
  compare suppliers and yourself
• Facilitation of collaborative projects
• Safety and Quality Assessment System  

(SQAS)

Cefic

Chemical

2

3

Confederation of European 
Paper Industries (CEPI)

Pulp and paper

• To Our Roots and Beyond project

42

43

 
#  Name  

Sector 

Tools

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

Consumer Goods Forum 
(CGF)

Consumer goods

Drive Sustainability

Automotive

Green Electronic Council 
(GEC)
International Council of 
Mining and Metals (ICMM)
International Petroleum 
Industry Environmental 
Conservation Association 
(IPIECA)

Kitchen Cabinet  
Manufacturers  
Association (KCMA)
Pharmaceutical Supply  
Chain Initiative (PSCI)
Responsible Business 
Alliance (RBA) – formerly  
the Electronic Industry 
Citizenship Coalition (EICC)
Retail Industry Leaders 
Association (RILA)

Information 
technology
Mining

Oil and gas

Cabinet 
manufacturing

Pharmaceuticals 
and healthcare
Electronics

Retail

Supplier Ethical Data 
Exchange (Sedex) 
Sustainable Apparel 
Coalition (SAC)
Together for Sustainability 
(TfS)
World Ports Sustainability 
Program (WPSP)

Cross-industry

Apparel, footwear 
and textile
Chemical

Maritime ports

• End-to-end Value Chain Initiative: 
  Best Practice Sharing, Learning Series
• Sustainable Supply Chain Initiative  
(SSCI): SSCI Benchmarking and 

  Recognition
• Self-assessment questionnaire (SAQ), 
• Supplier Training Series
• Raw Material Observatory
• Electronic Product Environmental 
• Assessment Tool (EPEAT)
• Details not available

Reports and guidance on various topics,  
among them:
• Low-emission pathways
• Transparency and reporting
• Emissions management
• KCMA Certification Seals: KCMA/ANSI  
  A161.1 Quality certification
• Environmental Stewardship Program
• Common Tools for guidance
• PSCI audit sharing program
• RBA Online
• Self-assessment questionnaire (SAQ)
• Risk Assessment Platform
• Risk Readiness Assessment
• Retail Sustainability Leadership Model
• Retail Sustainability Management  
  Resource Library
• Sustainability recognition opportunities 
• Sustainability reporting platforms
• Sedex Advance – collaborative platform
• Sedex Members Ethical Trade Audit
• Higg Index

• TfS Sustainability Assessment
• TfS Sustainability Audit
• WPSP Portfolio
• Environmental Ship Index (ESI)
• Further tools for CO2 reductions available 
  via the World Ports Climate Initiative  
  website (guidance document to develop or 
improve GHG emissions inventories; CO2 
  calculators; IAPH Tool Box for Port Clean  
  Air Programs)

Sector initiative cards
The following cards take a closer look at the sector initiatives listed in Table 3 to better understand how they 
can  support  organizations  in  achieving  the  intended  outcomes  when  implementing  actions  to  promote 
emissions reductions through the freight and logistics procurement process. 

CDP’s supply chain program 

Sector: Cross-industry

Active from: 2008

Brief description
CDP, formerly the Carbon Disclosure Project, runs the global disclosure system that enables compa-
nies, cities, states and regions to measure and manage their environmental impacts. Over the past 18 
years, CDP has built a comprehensive collection of self-reported environmental data worldwide.

CDP’s supply chain program enables purchasing organizations to engage their suppliers on environ-
mental issues to manage risks and drive positive action. Through CDP’s standardized global online 
reporting platform, supply chain members invite strategic suppliers to report their climate change, 
deforestation and water security information using CDP’s annual questionnaires.

CDP’s supply chain program supports purchasing organizations in collecting a primary data set, buil-
ding stronger supplier relationships, joining an established group and benefiting from tried and tested 
supplier engagement best practices, and changing the way suppliers do business for their customers 
and for their own economic and environmental benefit.

Tools
• 
•  Scope 3 report to help purchasing organizations integrate suppliers’ primary emissions data into  

Internationally recognized and standardized reporting platform.

their scope 3 inventory.

•  Analytics products to benchmark and compare suppliers.
•  Facilitation of collaborative projects for buyers and suppliers.

Link: www.cdp.net/supplychain 

Cefic 

Sector: Chemical 

Active from: 1972

Brief description
Based in Brussels, Cefic represents large, medium and small chemical companies across Europe. 
These companies directly provide 1.2 million jobs and account for 14.7% of the world’s chemical 
production. Cefic interacts on behalf of its 670 members with international and European Union 
institutions, non-governmental organizations, the international media, and other stakeholders. 

Cefic is also an active member of the International Council of Chemical Associations, which represents 
chemical manufacturers and producers all over the world and seeks to strengthen existing cooperation 
with global organizations, such as the United Nations Environment Programme and the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development, to improve chemicals management worldwide.

Tools
•  The Safety and Quality Assessment System (SQAS) is a standardized assessment that Cefic  

centrally manages and that organizations use to evaluate the quality, safety, security and environ- 
  mental performance of logistics service providers and chemical distributors. The SQAS covers all  
key service providers in the land-logistics chain: road transport companies, intermodal operators  
and terminals, rail carriers, rail tank car maintenance workshops, packaged goods warehouses  
and tank cleaning stations. Independent assessors carry out assessments.

•  Chemical companies use the SQAS system to support their risk management plan for logistics’  

activities as part of product stewardship. The SQAS reports provide good insights into the  strengths 
and weaknesses of (potential) service providers. Chemical companies use the assessment reports 

44

45

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cefic 

in their selection processes for new service providers and for the ongoing evaluation of the  
standards and performance of their existing ones. SQAS reports support the dialogue between  
chemical companies and their LSPs as part of a continuous improvement process.

Link: http://www.cefic.org/ 

Confederation of European Paper Industries (CEPI)

Sector: Pulp and paper

Active from: 1992

Brief description
The Confederation of European Paper Industries (CEPI) brings together national associations  
representing 18 countries from the pulp and paper industry across Europe to coordinate actions at the 
European level and support the industry’s strategy and objectives. CEPI’s goal is to bring added value  
to the industry for future growth. Its mission is to promote the uniqueness of the industry as an example 
to follow, demonstrating how sustainability and competitiveness can go hand in hand.

In order to achieve its mission, CEPI facilitates cooperation throughout the entire forest and paper 
chain. The European pulp and paper industry uses three basic modes of transport – rail, road and 
maritime – with road transport as the predominant mode. The organization recognizes that high-quality, 
flexible, cost-efficient and sustainable transport solutions are essential to maintaining the European 
pulp and paper industry’s competitiveness. 

Tools
The To Our Roots and Beyond project helps maintain focus on the industry’s leading role in contributing 
to a sustainable low-carbon society. The project demonstrates how industry is taking responsibility in 
reducing its carbon emissions, as well as taking a leading role in providing bio-based solutions to 
decarbonize society at large. In total, the project has gathered 14 innovative case studies from 10 
European Union countries involving 12 companies representing a diverse array of projects. The case 
studies focus on energy efficiency and/or renewables and are indicative of the diverse means the paper 
industry has at its disposal to reduce emissions while building upon its unique strength as an entirely 
renewable material.

Link: http://www.cepi.org/ 

Consumer Goods Forum (CGF)

Sector: Consumer goods

Active from: 2009

Brief description
The Consumer Goods Forum (CGF) is a global, parity-based industry network, driven by its members.  
 It brings together the CEOs and senior management of over 400 retailers, manufacturers, service 
providers and other stakeholders across 70 countries and reflects the diversity of the industry in 
geography, size, product category and format. Its board of directors, which includes 50 manufacturer 
and retailer CEOs and chairpersons, governs the Forum. The CGF provides a unique global platform for 
knowledge exchange and initiatives around four strategic pillars: sustainability, product safety, health 
and wellness, and end-to-end value chain and standards; the CGF's fifth focus area is knowledge and 
best practice sharing. It actively shares knowledge collectively created under the CGF umbrella with its 
members, strategic alliances and other key stakeholders.

The Forum’s vision is “Better lives through better business”. To fulfil this vision, its members have given 
the Forum the mandate to develop common positions on key strategic and operational issues affecting 
the consumer goods business, with a strong focus on non-competitively sensitive process improvement. 

Tools
•  End-to-End Value Chain Initiative: Best Practice Sharing, Learning Series.
•  Sustainable Supply Chain Initiative (SSCI): SSCI Benchmarking and Recognition.

Link: https://www.theconsumergoodsforum.com/ 

Drive Sustainability 

Sector: Automotive

Active from: 2013

Brief description
Drive Sustainability is a leading automotive partnership based on strong collaboration, innovation and 
impact. The initiative brings together 10 global automotive companies willing to address sustainability 
issues in raw material sourcing, committing to improve both its own performance and that of its 
supply chain.

The vision is to achieve excellence, innovation and performance in a sustainable manner, including 
ensuring that all individuals making vehicles or components or providing services receive decent 
working conditions and are treated with dignity and respect, while minimizing the environmental 
impact of the industry and promoting business integrity. The partnership’s mission is to drive sustain- 
ability throughout the global automotive supply chain by integrating sustainability in the overall 
procurement process.

Drive Sustainability’s set of common guidelines – the Global Automotive Sustainability Guiding 
Principles57 – outline expectations for suppliers on key responsibility issues, including human rights, 
the environment, working conditions and business ethics. The Guiding Principles represent the global 
strategy and base of all activities. 

Tools
• 

It uses a self-assessment questionnaire (SAQ) to assess the sustainability performance of  
automotive suppliers. It focuses on social and environmental sustainability, business conduct and  
compliance, and supplier management. It aligns with the Global Automotive Sustainability Guiding  
  Principles. The SAQ is globally applicable to all suppliers in the automotive supply chain, including  

sourcing, manufacturing, logistics, assembly and retail.

•  The supplier training series aims to build supplier capacity. The training series covers topics in areas  
such as social and environmental sustainability, business conduct and compliance, and supplier  

  management. The content is based on Global Automotive Sustainability Guiding Principles and  

tailored to the country where it offers training.

•  The Raw Material Observatory is a process to: (i) assess the sustainability risk of the top raw  
  materials for the automotive sector and (ii) identify potentially impactful activities that Drive  
  Sustainability partners could pursue collectively to address such risk. The Material Change report  
presents the results of the first round of raw material assessments. The report examines the  
responsible sourcing of materials in the automotive and electronics industries.

Link: https://drivesustainability.org/ 

46

47

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Green Electronic Council (GEC)

Sector: Information technology

Active from: 2005

Brief description
The Green Electronics Council (GEC) is a mission-driven non-profit that collaborates to achieve a world 
in which companies only design and manufacture and customers only purchase sustainable information 
technology (IT) products; it acts as the fulcrum point between those who buy (institutional purchasers) 
and those who make (IT brands) IT products. By deciding to buy sustainable IT products, institutional 
purchasers can help the world achieve greater sustainability: GEC supports them implement sustainable 
procurement and, through its flagship Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool (EPEAT) 
program, provides additional tools and resources. 

Tools
EPEAT is a leading global ecolabel for the IT sector and an easy-to-use resource for purchasers, 
manufacturers, resellers and others wanting to find or promote electronic products with positive 
environmental attributes. The EPEAT system evaluates electronics on more than 50 environmental 
criteria, some required and some optional, that measure a product's efficiency and sustainability 
attributes: products are rated gold, silver or bronze depending on how many optional criteria they meet.

EPEAT provides independent verification of manufacturers’ claims and the EPEAT online registry lists 
sustainable products from a broad range of manufacturers. National governments and private and public 
institutional purchasers around the world use EPEAT as part of their sustainable procurement decisions.

GEC developed EPEAT using a grant from the US Environmental Protection Agency. GEC manages it  
and maintains EPEAT's website and product registry; it also documents the environmental benefits 
resulting from the purchase of EPEAT-registered products.

Link: https://greenelectronicscouncil.org/ 

International Council of Mining and Metals (ICMM)

Sector: Mining and metals

Active from: 2001

Brief description
The ICMM is an international organization dedicated to a safe, fair and sustainable mining and metals 
industry. Bringing together 27 mining and metals companies and over 30 regional and commodity 
associations, the ICMM strengthens environmental and social performance. The council aims to serve 
as a catalyst for change, enhancing mining’s contribution to society. The ICMM is currently working on 
numerous programs and activities that relate to climate change, socio-economic development, and 
health and safety matters and involving a large number of companies and organizations.

The ICMM supports greater use of renewable energy, other cost-effective low-emissions technolo-
gies, and improved efficiency, including in member company operations. It recognizes that implemen-
ting cost-effective energy efficiency has the dual benefit of reducing operational greenhouse gas 
emissions while improving productivity and reducing costs. 

Tools
The ICMM encourages member companies to take voluntary actions to reduce GHG emissions by:
•  Developing greenhouse gas emissions reduction strategies (e.g., carbon reduction cost curve assessments,  

energy-efficiency studies) and implementing economical emissions reductions measures.

•  Ensuring the efficient use of natural resources.
•  Supporting research into and the development of low greenhouse gas emissions technologies relevant  

to the industry.

•  Measuring progress and reporting results.

Link: https://www.icmm.com/

International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conservation Association (IPIECA) 

Sector: Oil and gas

Active from: 1974

Brief description
The International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conservation Association (IPIECA) is a non-profit 
association providing a forum to encourage continuous improvement in the industry’s performance. 
It is a global association involving both the upstream and downstream oil and gas industry. It is also the 
industry’s principal channel of communication with the United Nations. 

IPIECA convenes industry and stakeholders to work on issues across the environmental spectrum, 
including oil spill preparedness and response, biodiversity and ecosystem services and water 
management. The association promotes environmentally responsible operations across the oil and 
gas sector by developing, sharing and promoting good practices and knowledge while its member 
companies continue to meet society’s demands for fuels and petroleum products.

Tools
Reports and guidance on various topics, among them:
•  Low emissions pathways.
•  Transparency and reporting; emissions management.

Link: http://www.ipieca.org/ 

Kitchen Cabinet Manufacturers Association (KCMA)

Sector: Cabinet manufacturing

Active from: 1955

Brief description
The Kitchen Cabinet Manufacturers Association (KCMA) is a non-profit organization that represents 
companies that manufacture kitchen cabinets, bath cabinets and other residential cabinets, and key 
kitchen and bath industry suppliers. With a membership of more than 300 companies throughout North 
America, KCMA works to advance the cabinet industry through standardization, advocacy, setting 
cabinet quality standards, and sponsoring kitchen and bath cabinet-related research, and by providing 
the cabinet industry with management tools and educational programs.

Tools
The KCMA Certification Seals:
•  KCMA/ANSI A161.1 Quality Certification, which certifies that products meet the established and  

proven standards for performance and durability.

•  The Environmental Stewardship Program (ESP), which proves that manufacturers build cabinets  
  with sustainable and responsible practices that benefit the environment and communities. As part  
of this certification, the manufacturer must enroll in the US Environmental Protection Agency’s  

  SmartWay Transport Partnership as a registered partner.

Link: https://www.kcma.org/

Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Initiative (PSCI)

Sector: Pharmaceuticals and healthcare

Active from: 2006

Brief description
The Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Initiative (PSCI) is a non-profit business membership organization in 
the United States. Its aim is to create a better supply chain in the pharmaceutical and healthcare 

48

49

 
 
 
 
Cefic 
industry. Its vision is to establish and promote responsible practices that will continuously improve 
social, health, safety and environmentally sustainable outcomes for the supply chains of its members. 
This includes:
•  Fair and safe work conditions and practices;
•  Responsible business practices;
•  Environmental sustainability and efficient use of resources.

The purpose of the initiative is to bring together the pharmaceutical industry to define, implement and 
champion responsible supply chain practices. Members of the PSCI share knowledge and expertise 
across the industry to drive complex, global change more effectively than any one organization can alone.

Its three strategic pillars are: (i) leadership; (ii) a community of improving suppliers; (iii) partnering.

Tools
•  PSCI develops common guidance tools assessing performance and risk and tailors them to the  

industry.

•  The PSCI audit sharing program enables suppliers to share audits with more than one member via  
a web-based platform, thus avoiding the replication of audits for each supplier and resulting in  
efficiency gains for members.

Link: https://pscinitiative.org/home 

Responsible Business Alliance (RBA)

Sector: Electronics

Active from: 2004

Brief description
The Responsible Business Alliance (RBA) is the world’s largest industry coalition dedicated to corporate 
social responsibility in global supply chains. Founded by a group of leading electronics companies, and 
formerly named the Electronic Industry Citizenship Coalition (EICC),58 RBA is committed to supporting 
the rights and well-being of workers and communities worldwide affected by global supply chains. RBA 
members commit to a common Code of Conduct and RBA holds them accountable for their actions 
under the code. Members use a range of RBA training and assessment tools to support continuous 
improvement in the social, environmental and ethical responsibility of their supply chains. 

Today the RBA is comprised of more than 140 companies, with combined annual revenue of over $5 
trillion, directly employing more than 6 million people. 

Tools
•  RBA Online, a sustainability data management system designed to help companies manage and  

share sustainability data.

•  A self-assessment questionnaire (SAQ).
•  The Risk Assessment Platform, which assesses inherent/potential risks of supplier sites for an early  

high-level risk assessment within supply chains.

•  The Risk Readiness Assessment, which assesses risks in raw material supply chains.

Link: http://www.responsiblebusiness.org/ 

Retail Industry Leaders Association (RILA)

Sector: Retail

Active from: 2007

Cefic 
Brief description
The Retail Industry Leaders Association (RILA) is a trade association in the US that promotes consumer 
choice and economic freedom through public policy and industry operational excellence. Executives participate 
in RILA for its educational forums, its public policy advocacy, and its advancement of the industry.

RILA focuses on core areas where retailers can collaborate to make a difference, including supply 
chains, sustainability, and technology and innovation.

RILA has three types of members: retailer, consumer product manufacturer and service provider.

Tools
RILA helps retailers become sustainability leaders through its Retail Sustainability Initiative (RSI). The RSI 
offers various programs and working groups that provide education, sharing and networking, such as:
•  The Retail Sustainability Leadership Model, which is a tool for retail sustainability executives to  

identify management practices that will drive improved corporate and sustainability performance.  
It represents the collective knowledge of many industry experts and numerous retailers.

•  The Retail Sustainability Management Resource Library composed of the Retail Sustainability  
  Management Maturity Matrix. Retailers can refer to the resource library for specific tools, case  

studies and further opportunities to help them advance the maturity of their programs.
•  Sustainability Recognition Opportunities, a matrix that summarizes a variety of recognition  
opportunities available through third parties to showcase leadership in areas ranging from  
operations to consumer engagement, with links to learn more.

•  Sustainability Reporting Platforms, a matrix providing an initial overview of the platforms most  

often used and referenced in the industry, with links to learn more about reporting on sustainability  
efforts and accomplishments. 

Link: https://www.rila.org/Pages/default.aspx 

Supplier Ethical Data Exchange (Sedex) 

Sector: Cross-industry

Active from: 2004

Brief description
The Supplier Ethical Data Exchange (Sedex) is a global membership organization that aims to make 
doing business that is good for everyone simpler by working with the right standards, information and 
technologies.

Sedex hosts one of the world’s largest collaborative platforms for the sharing of responsible sourcing 
data on supply chains. More than 50,000 members in over 150 countries use it to manage labor rights, 
health and safety, the environment and business ethics performance. Sedex services enable members 
to bring together many kinds of data, standards and certifications, to make informed business decisions, 
and to drive continuous improvement across their value chains.

Sedex works in partnership with many of the world’s most recognizable brands and thousands of 
factories, producers and industry experts to shape the future of global trade and to have an increasingly 
positive impact worldwide.

Tools
•  Sedex Advance is a collaborative platform for buyers, suppliers and auditors to store, share and  

report on information quickly and easily. It includes a self-assessment questionnaire (SAQ), which  
supplier and buyer members complete when they register.

•  The Sedex Members Ethical Trade Audit is a social audit procedure that provides a globally recognized  
  way to assess responsible supply chain activities, including labor rights, health and safety, the  

environment and business ethics.

Link: https://www.sedexglobal.com/ 

50

51

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainable Apparel Coalition (SAC)

Sector: Apparel, footwear and textile

Active from: 2010

Brief description
The Sustainable Apparel Coalition (SAC) is a leading apparel, footwear and textile industry alliance for 
sustainable production. Its vision is of an apparel, footwear and textiles industry that produces no 
unnecessary environmental harm and has a positive impact on the people and communities associated 
with its activities.

Tools
The Coalition develops the Higg Index, a standardized supply chain measurement suite of tools for all 
industry participants that enables brands, retailers and facilities of all sizes – at every stage in their 
sustainability journey – to accurately measure and score a company’s or product’s sustainability perfor-
mance. The Higg Index delivers a holistic overview that empowers businesses to make meaningful 
improvements that protect the well-being of factory workers, local communities and the environment.

The index measures environmental and social labor impacts across the supply chain. With this data, the 
industry can address inefficiencies, resolve damaging practices, and achieve the environmental and 
social transparency consumers are demanding. 

Link: https://apparelcoalition.org/ 

Together for Sustainability (TfS)

Sector: Chemical

Active from: 2011

Brief description
In order to enhance sustainability within the supply chain, a group of leading chemical companies joined 
forces in 2011 for the Together for Sustainability (TfS) initiative. The goal of the TfS initiative is to drive 
and foster global supply chain resilience, efficiency and sustainability in the chemical industry. 

The TfS initiative aims to build the industry’s standard for sustainable supply chains and has established 
a common approach to evaluating and improving the sustainability performance of chemical industry 
suppliers through a global program that assesses, audits and improves sustainability practices.

World Ports Sustainability Program (WPSP)

Sector: Maritime ports

Active from: 2017

Brief description
In May 2017, the International Association of Ports and Harbors (IAPH) set up the World Ports  
Sustainability Program (WPSP) to enhance and coordinate the future sustainability efforts of ports 
worldwide and foster international cooperation with supply chain partners. The WPSP builds on the 
World Ports Climate Initiative (WPCI) that IAPH started in 2008 and extends it to other sustainable 
development areas.59 

In this context, the WPSP aims to illustrate the global leadership of ports that contribute to the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The program seeks to empower port community actors 
worldwide to engage with business, government and society stakeholders and create sustainable added 
value for local communities and wider regions where they operate. The WPSP implements the SDGs 
along five themes, including climate and energy. This supports the Paris Agreement climate goal aiming 
to keep global warming well below 2°C. Building on the output of the WPCI, port community actors can 
collaborate in refining and developing tools to facilitate CO2 emissions reductions from shipping, port 
and landside operations. In addition, they can run programs to enable the energy transition, improve air 
quality and stimulate the circular economy.

Tools
•  The WPSP Portfolio is a global database of port-related sustainable development projects. Through  
the WPSP portfolio, ports worldwide and WPSP partner organizations raise awareness of their  
ongoing work on sustainability, share their experiences and provide inspiration.

•  The Environmental Ship Index (ESI) is a WPSP project that allows the identification of seagoing ships  
that perform better in reducing air emissions than required by the International Maritime Organization’s  
current emission standards. Several ports offer a substantial discount on harbor dues for ships with  
a high ESI score.

•  Further resources to facilitate CO2 emissions reductions are available via the WPCI website:
•  A guidance document that serves as a reference for ports looking to develop or improve their GHG  

emissions inventories.

•  CO2 calculators (Scopes 1 & 2; Scope 3 under construction).
• 

IAPH Tool Box for Port Clean Air Programs,60 which complements and supports the WPCI website by  
providing a resource for GHG case studies and emissions reduction strategies.

Link: https://sustainableworldports.org/  

Within the TfS initiative, members conduct assessments and audits based on a pre-defined set of 
criteria and then share them across members, improving efficiency for all involved.

C.   Sources

Tools
•  The TfS Initiative Sustainability Assessment is based on established international sustainability  

standards and provides expert feedback to both members and suppliers. The assessment covers  
the supplier’s sustainability management approach to the environment, labor practices and human  
rights, ethics and sustainable procurement. To ensure a consistent and reliable supplier assessment  
approach, the TfS initiative selected EcoVadis as its partner and service provider. A typical industry- 
specific assessment uses an online web-based questionnaire; the assessment is valid for three  
years, though members can ask their suppliers for more frequent assessments to show continuous  
improvement.

•  The TfS initiative Sustainability Audit is an onsite examination of a company’s sustainability practices.  
Independent companies perform audits using a pre-approved auditor pool. The scope typically  
covers a single or combined business location, such as a production site, warehouse or office  
building. The TfS initiative’s audit process verifies the supplier’s sustainability performance  
against a pre-defined set of management, environmental, health and safety, labor and human rights,  
and governance criteria.

Link: https://tfs-initiative.com/ 

Professional literature and company practices
•  A.P. Moller-Maersk A/S. 2017. “Sustainability Strategy 2014–2018”. Retrieved from https://www.maersk. 

com/en/about/sustainability/read-more-about-sustainability/sustainability-strategy. 

•  A.P. Moller-Maersk A/S. 2017. “Third Party Code of Conduct”. Retrieved from https://www.maersk.com/ 

en/about/sustainability/third-party-code-of-conduct. 

•  A.P. Moller-Maersk A/S. 2017. Sustainability Report 2017. Retrieved from https://www.maersk.com/en/ 

about/sustainability/reports. 

•  A.P. Moller-Maersk A/S. 2018. “Responsible Procurement”. Retrieved from https://www.maersk.com/ 

en/procurement/responsible-procurement. 

•  Association Club Déméter. 2018. “Dispositif FAIR FRET”. Retrieved from http://www.club-demeter.fr/. 
•  BICEPS (Boosting Initiatives for Collaborative Emission-reduction with the Power of Shippers) Network.  

2016. “BICEPS Rating System”. https://bicepsnetwork.org/rating-system/. 

52

53

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  BMW Group. 2017. BMW Group supplier sustainability policy. Retrieved from https://www.bmwgroup.com/ 
content/dam/grpw/websites/bmwgroup_com/responsibility/downloads/en/2017/Supplier_Sustainability_ 

  Policy.pdf.
•  BMW Group. 2017. Sustainable Supply Chain Management – Due Diligence in the Supply Chain. Retrieved  

from https://www.bmwgroup.com/content/dam/grpw/websites/bmwgroup_com/responsibility/ 
downloads/en/2017/BMW_Group_due_diligence_in_the_supply_chain.pdf.

•  BMW Group. 2018. “BMW Group International Terms and Conditions for the Purchase of Production  
  Materials and Automotive Components”. Retrieved from https://b2b.bmw.com/documents/14402/

7501963/180331_IPC+2018_EN_clean_v2.pdf/150a812c-228b-7ffc-323e-f576133c39ae. 

•  Carbon Disclosure Project – CDP. 2017. Missing link: Harnessing the power of purchasing for a sustainable  
future. Retrieved from https://www.cdp.net/en/research/global-reports/global-supply-chain-report-2017 

•  Clean Cargo Working Group – CCWG. 2015. How to Calculate and Manage CO2 Emissions from Ocean  
Transport. Retrieved from https://www.bsr.org/en/our-insights/report-view/how-to-calculate-and- 

  manage-co2-emissions-from-ocean-transport.
•  Foundation for Climate Friendly Procurement and Business – SKAO. 2017. How to use the CO2 Performance  
Ladder – A practical manual for companies, Part 1 and Part 2. Retrieved from https://www.skao.nl/ 
home_en. 

•  Foundation for Climate Friendly Procurement and Business – SKAO. 2015, Handbook: CO2 Performance  

Ladder 3.0. Retrieved from https://www.skao.nl/home_en. 

Academic literature/papers
•  Andersson, D., Dubois, A., Halldorsson, A. & Hulthén, K. 2016. “Purchasing transport services:  
  Relationships and conditions for ‘green connectivity’”. Paper 32. Green Logistics Management: Balancing  

environmental and shareholder priorities Colloquium. 29 September 2016. 

•  Broman, G. & Robèrt, K.H. 2015. “A Framework for Strategic Sustainable Development”. Journal of  
  Cleaner Production. 140. 10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.10.121. 

•  Celik, E., Erdogan, M. & Gumus, A.T. 2016. “An extended fuzzy TOPSIS–GRA method based on different  
separation measures for green logistics service provider selection”. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. (2016)  
13: 1377. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13762-016-0977-4.

•  Evangelista, P., Colicchia, C. & Creazza, A. 2017. “Is environmental sustainability a strategic priority for  
logistics service providers?”. Journal of Environmental Management. 198. 353-362. 10.1016/j.jenvman. 
2017.04.096. 

•  Evangelista, P., Huge-Brodin, M., Isaksson, K., & Sweeney, E. 2013. “Purchasing Green Transport and  
Logistics Services: Implications from the Environmental Sustainability Attitude of 3PLs”. In D. Folinas  
(Ed.), Outsourcing Management for Supply Chain Operations and Logistics Service (pp. 449-465). Hershey,  

•  Foundation for Climate Friendly Procurement and Business – SKAO. 2016. Procurement Guide Version  

  PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2008-7.ch026.

3.0. Retrieved from https://www.skao.nl/home_en. 

• 

• 

•  Global Environmental Management Initiative. 2018. GEMI Quick Guide: Strategic Buyer/Supplier Collaboration  
on Sustainability. Retrieved from http://gemi.org/solutions/solutions-quick-guides/gemi-quick-guide-on- 
buyer-supplier-collaboration-on-sustainability/. 
IKEA. 2013. “IWAY Standard: Transport section”. Retrieved from https://www.ikea.com/ms/en_US/pdf/ 
reports-downloads/IWAY-standard-transport-section.pdf. 
IKEA. 2016. “IWAY Standard”. Retrieved from https://www.ikea.com/ms/en_US/pdf/reports-downloads/ 
IWAY-standard-ed-5.2.pdf. 
INGKA Holding. 2018. Sustainability Summary Report FY17. Retrieved from https://www.ikea.com/ms/ 
en_US/pdf/sustainability_summary/INGKA_Sustainability_Summary_Report_FY17.pdf 
International Organization for Standardization – ISO. 2017. “ISO 20400:2017 standard on Sustainable  

• 
  Procurement”. Retrieved from https://www.iso.org/standard/63026.html. 
•  McKinnon, A. 2018. Decarbonizing Logistics: Distributing Goods in a Low Carbon World. Kogan Page Ltd.  

• 

ISBN 978-0-7494-8047-9.

•  New Zealand Sustainable Business Council – NZSBC. 2016. Sustainable procurement guidelines for  
freight. Retrieved from https://www.sbc.org.nz/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/119783/Sustainable- 
procurement-guidelines-for-freight.pdf.

•  Evangelista, P., Santoro, L. & Thomas, A. 2018. “Environmental Sustainability in Third-Party Logistics  
  Service Providers: A Systematic Literature Review from 2000–2016”. Sustainability. 10. 1627. 10.3390/ 

su10051627.

•  Govindan, K., Agarwal, V., Dhingra Darbari, J. & C. Jha, P. 2017. “An integrated decision making model for  
the selection of sustainable forward and reverse logistic providers”. Annals of Operations Research. 273.  
10.1007/s10479-017-2654-5.

•  Kähkönen, A.K., Lintukangas, K., Hallikas, J. & Evangelista, P. 2016. “Responsible buying practices in  
supply risk management”. International Journal of Integrated Supply Management. 2016 Vol.10 No.3/4.

•  L. Kudla, N. & Klaas-Wissing, T. 2012. “Sustainability in shipper-logistics service provider relationships:  
  A tentative taxonomy based on agency theory and stimulus-response analysis”. Journal of Purchasing  

and Supply Management. 18. 218-231. 10.1016/j.pursup.2012.04.001.

•  McKinnon, A. 2014. “The possible influence of the shipper on carbon emissions from deep-sea container  

•  Nike Inc. 2018. “Sourcing and Manufacturing standards”. Retrieved from https://sustainability.nike.com/ 

supply chains: An empirical analysis”. Maritime Economics & Logistics. 16. 10.1057/mel.2013.25. 

sourcing-manufacturing-standards. 

•  Nike Inc. 2018. FY16/17 Sustainable Business Report. Retrieved from https://sustainability.nike.com/ 

•  O. Large, R., Kramer, N. & Katharina Hartmann, R. 2013. “Procurement of logistics services and  

reports. 

•  Railsponsible website. http://railsponsible.org/. 
•  Railsponsible. 2018. Annual Report 2017-2018. Retrieved from http://railsponsible.org/download/ 

annual-report-2017-2018/. 

•  Railsponsible. 2018. “Railsponsible Position Paper on Climate”. Retrieved from http://railsponsible.org/ 
  wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Railsponsible_Climate-Position-Paper.pdf. 
•  Sustainable Purchasing Leadership Council – SPLC. 2016. Guidance for Leadership in Sustainable  
  Purchasing. Retrieved from https://www.sustainablepurchasing.org/guidance/. 
•  Unilever. 2017. Responsible Sourcing Policy – Working in partnership with our suppliers. Retrieved from  

https://www.unilever.com/Images/responsible-sourcing-policy-interactive-final_tcm244-504736_ 
en.pdf. 

•  United Nations Global Compact and Business for Social Responsibility (BSR). 2015. Supply Chain  
  Sustainability – A Practical Guide for Continuous Improvement. Retrieved from https://www.unglobal 

compact.org/library/205. 

sustainable development in Europe: Fields of activity and empirical results”. Journal of Purchasing and  

  Supply Management. 19. 122–133. 10.1016/j.pursup.2013.05.002. 

•  Raut, R., Kharat, M., Kamble, S. & Shekhar Kumar, C. 2016. “Sustainable Evaluation & Selection of  
potential Third Party Logistics providers (3PL): an Integrated MCDM Approach”. Benchmarking An  
International Journal 25(2):00-00 January 2018.

•  Rizet, C., Cruz, C. & de Lapparent, M. 2013. “Impact of logistical choices on freight transport carbon  

efficiency”. World Conference on Transport Efficiency. July 2013, France. 

54

55

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SFP Guidelines Contributors

Notes

The people who contributed to the SFP Guidelines are mostly from the Transforming Heavy Transport 
project and from the Global Logistics Emissions Council (GLEC). We would like to highlight the input of the 
following companies and experts.

Shippers 
•  H&M
•  Heineken
• 
Intel 
•  PepsiCo
•  Signify
•  Smurfit Kappa
•  Unilever
•  Walmart

LSPs/carriers
•  A.P. Moller-Maersk
•  DB Schenker
•  Deutsche Post DHL Group
•  Ewals
•  RCS Logistics
•  STEF 

Agencies/NGOs  
•  ADEME
•  CDP
•  Global Logistics Emissions Council
•  SKAO
•  TK Blue

Ian Wainwright – Futurecitylogistics

Experts
• 
•  David Coleman – Transficient
•  Marcio Dagosto – UFRJ
•  Alan Dirks – Port of Rotterdam
•  Pietro Evangelista – CNR-IRISS
•  Alan McKinnon – KHL University
•  Buddy Polovick – US Environmental Protection Agency
•  Jorge Tesler – Centro de Logistica y Sostenibilidad
•  Laetitia Dablanc – IFSTTAR

1  WBCSD and Smart Freight Centre developed a project concept to unify business in the low-carbon transition of freight transport with 
the working title Transforming Heavy Transport. The goal is to help create demand for low-carbon heavy transport and enhance 
collaboration. In particular, the project aims to: 

• 

• 

• 

Establish a global business community by identifying interdependencies between We Mean Business coalition partners,  
Smart freight Centre and external organizations;
Develop a We Mean Business strategy for heavy transport that builds on existing initiatives and covers the three Smart  
Freight Leadership behaviors;
Create a framework for logistics procurement that considers GHG emissions as guidance for companies that subcontract  
freight services. This will help mobilize action by logistics service providers and transport operators.

2  See the Low Carbon Technology Partnerships (LCTPi) initiative at https://www.wbcsd.org/Programs/Climate-and-Energy/Climate/
Low-Carbon-Technology-Partnerships-initiative. 
3  Smart Freight Leadership, as described in Annex A.
4  As they are global in scale, the issues that dominate the sustainable development agenda – i.e., climate and energy, environmental 
and social issues, including GHG emissions reductions – are too big for individual companies to tackle alone. Therefore, companies 
must work together to achieve improvements that have a real impact. Sector initiatives help to achieve this goal. By joining a sector 
initiative, companies can: share experiences and information; develop and apply common tools; work together on common projects 
to improve the sustainability of their supply chains and work to achieve GHG emissions reductions; and send a common message to 
their supply chains about sustainability.
5  For each action, we estimated the complexity of implementation by assessing all the sub-actions suggested in the Toolbox (see 
chapter 3) and expressed that as a percentage from 0% to 100%. We present this in a graph through the following equivalences:

0-20% = complexity of implementation 1 on 5;
21-40% = complexity of implementation 2 on 5;
41-60% = complexity of implementation 3 on 5;
61-80% = complexity of implementation 4 on 5;
81-100% = complexity of implementation 5 on 5.

6  A non-exhaustive list of interesting investor initiatives providing sustainability requirements includes CDP – Carbon Disclosure 
Project; DJSI – Dow Jones Sustainability Indices; MSCI – Morgan Stanley Capital International; Natural Capital Coalition; SASB – 
Sustainability Accounting Standards Board Foundation; and the TCFD – Task Force on Climate-Related Disclosure.
7  See Annex B: Sector initiatives.
8  Agency theory explains the relationship between principals and agents in business. Agency theory aims to resolve problems that 
can exist in agency relationships due to unaligned goals or different levels of aversion to risk. The most common agency relationship 
in finance occurs between shareholders (principal) and company executives (agents). See https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/
agencytheory.asp. 
9  In terms of the agency problems of sustainability in a shipper-LSP relationship, the main findings are: 

• 

• 

• 

Companies should better design and implement stimuli for sustainability (i.e., selection criteria and incentives) aimed at  
shippers; agency theory can support traditional problems, such as moral hazards and adverse selection;
The proactiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises and larger companies are different and impacts and drivers are  
different; you should take this into account when establishing procurement processes;
Sustainability in one-on-one or supply chain relationships demands different points of view and datasets, such as from a  
local firm or from a network perspective.

10  This action logically follows the establishment of KPIs as per Action 0.2 – Award scheme establishment.
11  For instance, we propose a two-phase model based on data envelopment analysis (DEA) and analytic network process (ANP) 
techniques:
• 

The methodology allows for the evaluation and selection of LSPs and freight operators in two steps: initial screening of   
maximally efficient third-party logistics providers using DEA; and ANP-based final ranking and selection. ANP enables   
companies to consider the degree of inter-dependences among the criteria.
Selection criteria could be transportation charge per metric ton per km; fleet capacity/strength; vehicle type and quality  
(rejection %); driver rejection %; LSP/freight operator performance with desired output; flexibility; vehicle lead (response)  
times. Eco-efficient transportation leads to better transportation planning, better inventory and warehouse management,  
lower inventory costs and sustainable supply chain operations.

• 

12  Agency theory explains the relationship between principals and agents in business. Agency theory aims to resolve problems that 
can exist in agency relationships due to unaligned goals or different levels of aversion to risk. The most common agency relationship 
in finance occurs between shareholders (principal) and company executives (agents). See https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/
agencytheory.asp.
13  The final KPIs and their benchmark values can be definitively agreed in the Contracting phase, but we recommend that you start 
their elaboration in the Planning phase so as to ensure their alignment with the shipper’s objectives of cutting CO2 emissions and 
monitoring supplier performance throughout the entire smart freight procurement process.
14  Govindan, K., Agarwal, V., Dhingra Darbari, J. & C. Jha, P. 2017. “An integrated decision making model for the selection of sustainable 
forward and reverse logistic providers”. Annals of Operations Research. 273. 10.1007/s10479-017-2654-5.
15  This can immensely improve the sustainable performance value of the supply chain network and secure reasonable profits. You 
can achieve this by introducing 7 economic criteria in LSP evaluation: financial position, asset ownership, optimization capabilities, cost 
of service, reputation and market position, experience in a similar industry, geographical location. Through this, it is possible to obtain a 
reasonable trade-off between financial gains and association with sustainable partners. Emphasis must be put on evaluating logistics 
partners on social and environmental criteria along with the traditional economic criteria to enhance the firm’s sustainability image.
16  O. Large, R., Kramer, N. & Katharina Hartmann, R. 2013. “Procurement of logistics services and sustainable development in 

56

57

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42   Eighteen (18) of them are Rapid Deployment Centers (RDCs) and roughly half of Home Depot’s products flow through those RDCs. 
At the RDCs, vendor freight delivers to Home Depot’s mechanized cross-dock buildings and the company swiftly delivers products 
straight to stores and places them directly on store shelves. Stores receive daily deliveries from the RDCs, which has allowed Home 
Depot to cut the amount of inventory each retail location must keep.
43  See https://www.unilever.com/Images/responsible-sourcing-policy-interactive-final_tcm244-504736_en.pdf. 
44  See https://www.unilever.com/about/suppliers-centre/unilever-supplier-qualification-system/. 
45  See https://www.skao.nl/news_en/%E2%80%98The_CO2_Performance_Ladder_is_a_driver_for_structural_CO2_ reducti-
on%E2%80%99 _-6666.
46  The CO2 Performance Ladder is an accredited certification scheme originally developed by the Dutch railway in 2009; since 2011, 
the Foundation for Climate Friendly Procurement and Business (SKAO) owns and manages the system. The CO2 Performance 
Ladder helps organizations gain insights into and reduce their carbon emissions internally, in projects and in their supply chain 
business sector. It covers energy use and CO2 emissions. The instrument is both a CO2 management system as well as a procure-
ment tool that awards advantages to companies and projects with specific CO2 policies, in accordance with European Union 
procurement law. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development mentions the Ladder among best practices for 
sustainable procurement (2015).
47  See https://corporate.walmart.com/2016grr/enhancing-sustainability/reducing-energy-intensity-and-emissions. 
48  See https://www.freightsharelab.com/freightsharelab2018/en/page/home. 
49  McKinnon, A. (2018). Decarbonizing Logistics: Distributing Goods in a Low Carbon World. Kogan Page Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7494-8047-9.
50  See https://www.wbcsd.org/Programs/Climate-and-Energy/Climate/Low-Carbon-Freight/
Resources/A-Low-Carbon-Freight-report-under-WBCSDs-LCTPi. 
51  See http://www.nucms.nl/tpl/learn/upload/LEARN%20Summary%202019%20-%20GLEC%20Declaration%20-%20online 
%20%281%29.pdf.
52  See http://www.smartfreightcentre.org/glecframework/glecframework. 
53  See http://www.learnproject.net/. 
54  See https://www.inboundlogistics.com/cms/article/using-smartway-data-to-inform-transportation-purchasing-decisions. 
55  See https://www.epa.gov/smartway. 
56  See https://practicegreenhealth.org/pubs/epp/FiveEasyWays.pdf and https://practicegreenhealth.org/sites/default/files/
upload-files/smartway_supplier_disclosure.pdf.
57  See https://drivesustainability.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Guiding-Principles.pdf. 
58  In October 2017, the Electronic Industry Citizenship Coalition (EICC) became the Responsible Business Alliance (RBA) to reflect its 
expanded reach and influence.
59  The World Ports Climate Initiative’s mission is to:

Raise awareness of the need for action in the port and maritime community;
Initiate studies, strategies and actions to reduce GHG emissions and improve air quality;
Provide a platform for the maritime port sector to exchange information;

• 
• 
• 
•  Make information on the effects of climate change on the maritime port environment and measures for its mitigation available.

60  The purpose of the International Association of Ports and Harbors (IAPH) Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Tool Box is to provide  
ports, both members and non-members of the IAPH, with quick access to the tools needed to start the planning process to address 
port-related air quality and climate change issues. See http://wpci.iaphworldports.org/iaphtoolbox/.

Europe: Fields of activity and empirical results”. Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management. 19. 122–133. 10.1016/j.
pursup.2013.05.002.
17  The Incoterms specify who organizes and pays for the physical movement of goods, their insurance while in transit and customs 
clearance. It is known that the amount of leverage that a shipper can exert on “carbon-sensitive” decisions depends partly on the 
Incoterms employed and the use of freight forwarders, as the Incoterms can give the shippers a substantial degree of control over 
their global supply chains, in particular for inbound transport. (See McKinnon, A. 2014. “The possible influence of the shipper on 
carbon emissions from deep-sea container supply chains: An empirical analysis”. Maritime Economics & Logistics. 16. 10.1057/
mel.2013.25.)
18  Agency theory explains the relationship between principals and agents in business. Agency theory aims to resolve problems that 
can exist in agency relationships due to unaligned goals or different levels of aversion to risk. The most common agency relationship 
in finance occurs between shareholders (principal) and company executives (agents). See https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/
agencytheory.asp.
19  Evangelista, P., Huge-Brodin, M., Isaksson, K., & Sweeney, E. 2013. “Purchasing Green Transport and Logistics Services: Implications 
from the Environmental Sustainability Attitude of 3PLs”. In D. Folinas (Ed.), Outsourcing Management for Supply Chain Operations and 
Logistics Service (pp. 449-465). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2008-7.ch026.
20  Evangelista, P., Huge-Brodin, M., Isaksson, K., & Sweeney, E. 2013. “Purchasing Green Transport and Logistics Services: Implications 
from the Environmental Sustainability Attitude of 3PLs”. In D. Folinas (Ed.), Outsourcing Management for Supply Chain Operations and 
Logistics Service (pp. 449-465). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2008-7.ch026.
21  Green Freight Programs promote the use of technologies and practices able to improve the efficiency of the freight sector, while 
ensuring the possibility to benchmark and track performance. The final objectives are cost cutting, carbon tracking and creating 
environmental benefits. See “What are Green Freight Programs” at http://www.globalgreenfreight.org/why-green-freight/what-
are-green.
22  See https://www.maersk.com/en/procurement/responsible-procurement 
23  The Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) highlights this case as part of its Global Supply Chain Report to support collaboration and 
transparency in the value chain. The 2017 edition explores how purchasers and suppliers are working together to improve sustainability 
across global supply chains and taking advantage of low-carbon opportunities. It includes the Braskem case as an example of the 
framework approach for reducing carbon emissions and water impacts in the supply chain, in the section “Act”. See https://www.
cdp.net/en/research/global-reports/global-supply-chain-report-2017. The CDP is an initiative that supports companies and cities in 
disclosing the environmental impact of major corporations. It aims to make environmental reporting and risk management a 
business norm and to drive disclosure, insight and action to achieve a sustainable economy. CDP works with purchasing organizations 
and suppliers to reduce climate, water and forest risks. 
24  See the Dow Corporate Sustainability Report 2017 at https://corporate.dow.com/en-us/science-and-sustainability/reporting. 
25  GEMI brings together leading companies dedicated to fostering global environmental, health and safety and sustainability 
excellence through the sharing of tools and information to help business achieve environmental sustainability excellence. Through 
the collaborative efforts of its members, GEMI also promotes a worldwide business ethic for environmental, health and safety 
management and sustainable development through example and leadership. GEMI provides guidance for companies in a wide range 
of industrial sectors to work together in a cost-effective manner. Among the solutions, its Quick Guide aims to support companies in 
engaging with their suppliers in more collaborative ways to create shared value. See https://corporate.ford.com/microsites/
sustainability-report-2017-18/operations/supplier-impact/reducing-footprint.html.
26  Download the IWAY Standard from https://www.ikea.com/ms/en_US/pdf/reports-downloads/IWAY-standard-ed-5.2.pdf. 
27  See https://www.inboundlogistics.com/cms/article/jj-uses-sustainability-to-strengthen-carrier-relationships. 
28  See https://www.epa.gov/smartway.
29  See https://www.smartfreightcentre.org/en/news/blog/849/?token=XB1IUltvYhmcjSSLs-BPysiaJWuo3WL9. 
30  See https://www.smartfreightcentre.org/en/what-is-smart-transport-managers-training/. 
31  See https://sustainability.nike.com/sourcing-manufacturing-standards. 
32  The reported example is based on the Sustainable Purchasing Leadership Council (SPLC) case “Carbon Neutrality: How Philips’ 
Procurement & Sustainability Teams Delivered Results”, available at https://www.sustainablepurchasing.org/library/. The SPLC is a 
non-profit organization whose mission is to support and recognize purchasing leadership that accelerates the transition to a 
prosperous and sustainable future. It has defined 5 principles (understanding; commitment; results; innovation; transparency), 
along with guidance. It has developed maturity levels (initiating; developing; improving; leading) to allow purchasers to benchmark 
where they are at themselves. The SPLC guide aims to be a comprehensive handbook to help organizations to iteratively grow their 
sustainable purchasing efforts into a comprehensive sustainable purchasing program, thus improving environmental, social and 
economic performance within their supply chains. The guidance also helps them link sustainable purchasing to business processes 
and financial performance. SPLC Benchmark is a program released in 2017 that enables diverse organizations to assess their own 
sustainable purchasing activities against the recommendations in SPLC’s Guidance and to benchmark the maturity of their sustaina-
ble purchasing activities against those of other organizations. This voluntary program is the basis for the SPLC Awards, a rating 
system rewarding organizations that demonstrate leadership in sustainable purchasing; it also aims to provide standardization to 
suppliers and purchasers. SPLC adds all awarded case studies to its Case Study Library and cross links them with the SPLC 
Guidance. 
33  See https://www.portofrotterdam.com/en/shipping/sea-shipping/port-dues/discounts-on-port-dues 
34  See https://www.portofrotterdam.com/en/files/general-terms-and-conditions-including-port-tariffs 
35  See https://www.greenaward.org/ 
36  See http://www.environmentalshipindex.org/Public/Home 
37  See http://wpci.iaphworldports.org 
38  Schneider is a provider of truckload, intermodal and logistics services in North and Central America and China. Its services 
include regional, long-haul, expedited, dedicated, bulk and intermodal transport, brokerage, cross-dock logistics, supply chain 
management, and port logistics. Its website includes a Knowledge Hub that aims to be a source of answers. It is organized by shipper 
challenges, services and type of content and includes an article dedicated to requests for proposals (RFPs).
39  See https://schneider.com/knowledge-hub/best-practices/how-to-create-an-effective-transportation-request-for-proposal 
40  See http://www.tlimagazine.com/sections/trucking-and-freight/2236-home-depot 
41  At the end of the second quarter, the company operated a total of 2,270 retail stores in all 50 U.S. states, the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, 10 Canadian provinces and Mexico. The company employs more than 370,000 associates. 
Home Depot is the largest home improvement retailer in the world.

58

59

 
 
 
 
Contact

Smart Freight Centre
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM

Amsterdam, Netherlands

P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT
Amsterdam, Netherlands

Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405
www.smartfreightcentre.org

info@smartfreightcentre.org

