Summary Report 
Roundtable on Freight Decarbonization in India 
29th November 2023, Mumbai 

SESSION SUMMARY 

1.  The roundtable was opened by Christoph Wolff, CEO, Smart Freight Centre (SFC), who presented 
SFC work to the audience, expanding upon its global credentials on Emissions Accounting and 
ZET (Zero Emission Trucks) adoption under Freight Electrification Coalition initiative. Christoph 
emphasized the close collaboration that SFC has established with the freight industry comprising 
of some of largest shippers, LSPs and Carriers across the globe on its activities. He also presented 
on  the  SFC  India  program,  particularly  on  the  Niti  Aayog’s  e-FAST  platform,  and  the  defined 
process  to translate  the  aggregated demand of 7750 trucks  into fundable  ZET pilots on select 
corridors.  

2.  Ms Sumita Dawra, Special Secretary, DPIIT, Govt. of India, made a presentation on the green 
infrastructure encompassing green warehousing, green ports, and highlighted the GIS-enabled 
platform for the PM Gati Shakti initiative, in addition to the role of the National Logistics Policy 
in promoting sustainability. The discussion included strategies for eco-friendly warehousing and 
green port development, aligning with the commitment to sustainable practices. 

3.  The session was further enriched by a virtual address by Shri Sudhendu J. Sinha, Advisor, NITI 
Aayog, who talked about the need for immediate action on ZET adoption as a logical pathway to 
a net zero future for India, with the same being undertaken with a strategic approach under e-
FAST (Electric Freight Accelerator for Sustainable Transport – India). He also commended the work 
done by SFC along with other knowledge partners on e-FAST implementation, emphasizing upon 
the need for Industry collaboration and ecosystem support on translating the e-FAST vision into 
measurable impact with ZET pilot rollout. 

4.  A following session by Ms Chandana K. and Mr Pravin C. from WRI presented the progress on e-
FAST, including a view on the aggregated demand with further elaboration on the three strategy 
pillars for further implementation of E-FAST. The presentation also highlighted the integral role 
of multiple stakeholders in achieving desired outcomes with a timebound exercise and provided 
a view on upcoming ZET pilots with a case study on Freight Corridor Electrification, focused on 
Gujarat and Rajasthan. The case study provided insights on freight volume along primary corridor 
and emphasized upon proximity of specific industries as pertinent to regional considerations. 

5.  Another session facilitated by the Mr Ashish Saraswat and Mr Nitant Kumar from Climate Group, 
outlined the challenges within the E-Trucks ecosystem, encompassing limited financing options 
with high interest rates, Logistic Service Providers' (LSPs) need for risk mitigation assurance in e-

 
 
 
 
 
truck adoption, and the absence of Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) parity between e-MHDT and 
diesel trucks. The session further shed light on the MHDT landscape in India, delineating use cases 
and  segment  application  matrices.  It  identified  prioritized  use  cases  for  diverse  freight 
commodities based on various variables, with a detailed focus on three major segments: Parcel, 
perishable  goods,  and  minerals.  Additionally,  the  session  presented  a  prospective  adoption 
timeline for e-Trucking in India up to 2030.  

6.  A study presented by Mr Tattaiyya Bhattacharjee and Mr Rijhul Ladha from UC Davis highlighted 
upon  the  technology  considerations for  Zero  Emission  Transport  (ZET)  adoption,  providing  a 
nuanced understanding of various components of vehicle technology costs, including Total Cost 
of  Ownership  (TCO)  estimation.  The  session  also  delved  into  different  types  of  charging 
infrastructure  services, highlighting key considerations. These insights are crucial for informed 
decision-making in embracing ZET, and potential implications for future initiatives. 

7.  Mr.  Aaran  Patel  spoke  on  behalf  of  The  Nand  and  Jeet  Khemka  foundation  expanded  on 
foundation present focus on supporting climate  initiatives  and how  the foundation supported 
CESL on the world’s largest e-bus tender for 5,450 e-buses in September 2022, under the NEBP, 
which  has  a  target  of  deploying  50,000  e-buses  by  2030.  Aaran  further  expressed  interest  to 
explore areas that the foundation would support on the e-truck pilots, based upon the learnings 
and success from the e-BUS support program. 

8.  An insightful online session conducted by Mr. Rajat Kumar Saini, IAS, CEO & MD, NICDC, provided 
a comprehensive overview of the Unified Logistics Interface Platform (ULIP). He elaborated on 
ULIP's role and functionality within the logistics domain. The session also explored the Logistics 
Data  Bank  utilizing  the  FOIS  (Freight  Operations  Information  System)  system.  Additionally, 
discussions with stakeholders highlighted the challenges in obtaining real-time emission data and 
concerns  related  to  data  privacy.  The  discussion  shed  light  on  innovative  solutions  and 
integrations  within  the  logistics  sector,  with  these  considerations  as  vital  for  strategic  freight 
planning. 

9.  A  dynamic  session  led  by  Mr.  Deepak  Suri,  Senior  Sector  Expert  from  the  Bureau  of  Energy 
Efficiency  (Ministry  of  Power)  provided  valuable  insights  into  incentivizing  and  monetizing 
emission reduction efforts. Mr. Suri's presentation covered a comprehensive view of the freight 
landscape  in  India,  encompassing  freight  growth  projections,  the  evolution  of  zero-emission 
trucks, and the economic and environmental impact of road freight dominance. Furthermore, Mr. 
Suri outlined various Indian government initiatives for the decarbonization of the freight sector, 
including policies such as FAME1 and FAME2, the development of Zero Emission Transport (ZET) 
corridors,  deployment  of  electric  vehicle  charging  infrastructure,  introduction  of  hydrogen-
powered public buses, and the establishment of dedicated freight corridors. The session delved 
into  the  regulatory  framework  of  the  Carbon  Credit  Trading  Scheme  (CCTS),  highlighting  key 

 
 
 
 
elements,  and  presenting  a  compliance  mechanism  with  a  three-stage  model  for  future 
implementation: Baseline scenario, Exceeding the target, and Shortfall in the target. Additionally, 
Mr. Suri detailed a seven-stage project cycle offset mechanism. These strategic insights are crucial 
for freight sustainability initiatives. BEE further emphasized on following questions that would be 
key to defining the way forward for emissions accounting for Indian freight sector. 
10. How to prepare a baseline scenario with limited data availability in the freight sector? 
11. Who are the target groups in CCTS? 
12. How to obtain exact CO2 emissions? 

10. Mr.  Ankit  Singhvi  from  NZT  led  an  interactive  session  on  what  does  Financing  mean  for  the 
stakeholders  in  the  ecosystem  deciphering  the  financing  perspective  from  lens  of  Shippers, 
Logistics  Service  Providers  (transport  &  asset  owners),  OEM  (vehicle,  charging)  and  Financial 
Institutions  (Banks,  NBFC,  PE,  DFI,  philanthropy  etc.).  Learnings  from  the  E-bus  market  was 
presented as a nudge for a similar exercise in the E-truck sector and how specific commitments 
can lead to larger transitions. The need for operationalizing ZET pilots was also highlighted as the 
industry  would  believe  in  transition  more  effectively  when  it  sees  the  ZETs  operate  in  their 
ecosystems and geography on ground. Catalyzing adoption at scale through First loss guarantee 
program was also deliberated upon. 

11. A presentation by Ms Avni Mehta from GIZ addressed the crucial topic of Digitization for Freight 
Efficiency Improvements. Ms. Mehta presented her ongoing work focused on achieving climate-
friendly  and  efficient  logistics  with  four  key  objectives:  Strategic  &  Institutional  framework, 
Measures for Implementation, Capacity Building, and Methods for measuring GHG emissions. The 
discussion emphasized the significance of addressing inefficiencies in the freight sector, covering 
various aspects such as low truck productivity and fuel efficiency, components of logistics costs 
for different vehicle types, and loading time and cost, specifically for perishable commodities. Ms. 
Mehta presented a case study of the Textile market in Gandhi Nagar, highlighting loading and 
unloading inefficiencies. Furthermore, the session explored high turnaround times for heavy-duty 
and light-duty freight vehicles at four wholesale agri markets (Mandis) in Delhi, discussing load 
factors  for  different  modes  in  both  textile  and  fruits  &  vegetable  commodities.  Ms.  Mehta 
showcased  a  comprehensive  supply  chain  of  the  textile  freight  market,  detailing  various 
characteristics such as cost, average trip length, and load factor. Solutions for improvement in 
fuel economy, freight optimization, and monitoring emissions were also presented, including fuel 
economy standards for HDVs, Light & Commercial Vehicles, and the development of a Computer-
Based  Simulation  tool  provisionally  named  Bharat  Energy  Efficiency  Tool  (BEET)  for  assessing 
vehicle  fuel  efficiency.  These  strategic  insights  are  pertinent  for  the  roadmap  of  freight 
decarbonization strategies in India. 

12.  Mr Joseph Teja from CALSTART shared with stakeholders a policy framework for unlocking capital 
investments for zero emission trucks in India, which aims to deploy more than 8000 electric trucks 

 
 
 
 
by  2030,  creating  a  $2  billion  investment  opportunity.  The  framework  recognizes  that  the  required 
transformative scale cannot rely solely on public funds and suggests leveraging commercial capital to 
fill the gap. The framework also recommends creating a seamless legal framework for blending different 
sources  of  capital,  resolving  concerns  about  expensive  and  time-consuming  structures,  developing  a 
strategic view on blending as an investment approach, developing a pipeline of bankable projects, and 
creating capacity around impact measurement, especially for commercial investors. 

13. The discussion was also joined by Shri Abhijit B Ghorpade, Director, State Climate Action Cell, 
Department of Environment and Climate Action, Government of Maharashtra, who presented 
a wider view on why sustainability is a pertinent question for any growth-oriented economy, 
with Maharashtra being an apt case study for the same.  He provided the audience with a view 
on  wide-ranging  initiatives  by  Maharashtra,  particularly  the  one  with  a  Green  Infrastructure 
Development orientation. He also presented the leadership position taken by Maharashtra on e-
Mobility ecosystem development, with the ambition and scale of e-BUS deployment and charging 
infra development in the state being a fitting testimony to the same. He concluded by the need 
to decarbonize the freight sector, more so with the freight volume and sector (both demand and 
supply side) concentration in the state and invited the industry stakeholders to come forward on 
this important topic with a clearly expressed intent to discuss on required state support.  

14. A session on freight digitization for efficiency improvements by Mr Aviral Yadav of ICCT provided 
critical insights into the current state of the freight sector in India, specifically focusing on CO2 
emissions. The presentation was particularly intriguing as it delved into and compared the Total 
Cost  of  Ownership  (TCO)  perspective  of  seven  different  fuel-based  technologies.  This 
comprehensive  analysis  is  crucial  for  evaluating  the  economic  implications  of  various  fuel 
technologies  in the  freight sector. Additionally, the  session shed light on India's Zero Emission 
Transport  (ZET)  roadmap,  presenting  a  strategic  vision  for  the  country's  transition  toward 
sustainable and zero-emission freight.  

15. An engaging online session by Prof. Aditya Gupta from IIM Bangalore provided valuable insights 
into emission accounting through the utilization of an online tool called  TEMT (Transportation 
Emission Measurement  Tool).  The  tool is designed to measure emissions across  all modes of 
transportation, providing a holistic approach to emission accounting. It incorporates India-specific 
emission factors to the extent possible, ensuring relevance and accuracy in the  context of our 
region.  It  offers  two  types  of  access  -  carrier  and  shipper  access  -  facilitating  collaborative 
engagement and transparency between stakeholders. Additionally, the tool provides output in 
the  form of a CSV report, enabling further analysis and insights for informed decision-making. 
These features make TENT a robust tool for emission accounting in the transportation sector. 

16. Mr. Piyush Saxena from TERI presented on Clean Freight Programme: Learnings & Adoption in 
India, which aims to reduce  the GHG emissions and air pollution from the road freight sector, 

 
 
 
 
which  is projected to grow  significantly by 2030. TERI compared the  global best practices  and 
frameworks for clean freight programs and developed a methodology and a tool for estimating 
the baseline emissions from the road freight sector in India. TERI also conducted a baseline study 
for  the  non-urban  road  freight  sector  in  India  and  identified  the  state-wise  and  vehicle-wise 
variations in fuel efficiency and emission intensity. TERI proposed a way forward for implementing 
the clean freight program in India, involving a multi-stakeholder platform, a recognition scheme, 
and a policy framework. TERI also suggested a responsibility matrix for the key partners of the 
clean freight program in India. 

17. A presentation was made by Mr. Mehul Khandelwal, Technical Manager at SFC Europe office, on 
the GLEC (Global Logistics Council framework), covering the background on its development in 
consultation with the Global Freight Community, its widespread adoption by the global logistics 
industry,  its  salient  features  and  also  global  recognition  of  GLEC  as  a  part  of  the  ISO14083 
standard. Mehul further expanded upon the ongoing work on GLEC alignment with the Indian 
freight emission factors and the collaboration with TERI, IIMB and GIZ on the same. 

18. Mr.  Rohit  Pathania  form  OMI  Foundation  emphasized  on  the  need  for  Transport  sector 
decarbonization and highlighted Road Freight emissions in India and the significant contributors 
to Transport related GHG emissions. A global comparative overview of the work being done in 
various  countries  through  multiple  measures  was  presented  indicating  the  direction  of  the 
initiatives  in each region. Insights on decarbonization through Market based Mechanisms and 
how  Article  6  can  help  achieve  NDC's  were  made  available  along  with  case  examples  from 
California's Zero Emission Vehicle program and China's New Energy Vehicle (NEV) program. OMI 
foundation drew the focus on Market Based Initiatives in India and where they stand indicating 
the scope for carbon markets in India. 

19. Special remark by Shri OP Agrawal towards the end of the program highlighted the need for such 
discussions at regular intervals to leverage the vast knowledge base with the knowledge partners 
for addressing the capacity gaps for advancing the freight decarbonization in India, with the same 
being a critical need of the hour, not just towards NDC commitments by India but also towards a 
more sustainable future for Indian Freight Sector. 

20.  Closing  remarks  to  the  event  were  made  by  Mr  Narayankumar  Sreekumar,  Shakti  Sustainable 
Energy Foundation and Mr Sean Cooke, UNEP thanking the participants for their insightful studies 
and research and the active  participation by the  industry which  paves the  way to  move aggressively 
towards electrifying road freight ecosystem and the need for standardizing emissions accounting. Mr 
Sean  Cooke  also  gave  an  overview  of  UNEPs  Global  Electric  Mobility  Program  inviting  ideas  and 
collaboration for future endeavors from the participants of the roundtable through SFC India. 

 
 
 
 
 
KEY TAKEAWAYS 

  Government of India vision of Freight Efficiency improvement under the Gati Shakti Master Plan 
is  an  opportunity  for  pro-active  action  on  freight  decarbonization,  built  upon  new  age 
technologies, to deliver against the set goal of reduced logistics cost in proportion to the GDP. 
  Energy efficiency improvements are critical to improve upon freight economics in consideration 

of the energy (fuel) cost as the largest component in the overall freight activity cost. 

  Clean Fuel and Vehicle technologies hold huge impact potential, particularly in the medium and 
heavy-duty segments in cognizance of their present GHG contribution to overall freight emissions. 
  BEV  (Battery  Electric  Vehicles)  hold  maximum  emission  reduction  potential  across  its  entire 
product life  cycle  when powered by renewable  energy sources, as  compared  to other vehicle 
powertrain technologies, including Fuel Cell Electric Vehicles with Green H2 as energy source. 
  BEVs  offer  the  best  TCO  scenario  across  various  truck  segments,  to  the  tune  of  20-25%  as 

 

 

compared to Fuel Cell Vehicles for heavy duty segments, with 2030 as baseline year.  
Industry  supported  initiatives  on  freight  decarbonization,  including  e-FAST,  is  a  showcase 
opportunity  to  establish  India’s  leadership  position  in  development  of  a  global  ecosystem  for 
Green Freight, more so for the scale and volume of Indian logistics sector and the potential impact. 
Investments in green logistics infrastructure will have an enhanced business case for high volume 
freight corridors as a future proofing strategy with sustainability alignment. 

  ULIP as a government of India platform addresses the key challenge of data availability for freight 
efficiency improvement and to also build case for collaborative freight decarbonization programs.  
  Emissions accounting is a key step towards analyzing the BAU scenario for emissions footprint 
from an enterprise operation and there is a visible interest from Industry to identify efficient and 
effective methods for the same. Government guidance on the same with standardization of the 
available frameworks will be an important step in this direction.  

  A national carbon market can help level the playing field between ZETs and ICE Trucks by offering 
a financial avenue to monetize the emission reductions and integrate into the business case for 
enhanced viability of ZET deployment initiatives for India. 

  The service industry is also bracing up well to provide solutions towards awareness on emissions 
accounting from freight operations, with a good number of the same basing their methodologies 
on SFC’s GLEC framework. Many multinational corporations in India are already using GLEC for 
measuring freight emissions under their sustainable supply chain initiatives.  

  While support in Finance for ZET pilots under e-FAST is an expectation from some Shippers and 
LSP’s, there are certain LSPs and shippers who are ready to manage the finance aspect at their 
own end, with product availability being the single largest concern for transition of Medium and 
Heavy-Duty trucks towards electric. 

  For the organizations seeking clarity on philanthropic and development finance for ZET pilots, the 
potential scenario as presented in the discussion, is positive, with only expectation from the funds 
is the deployment scale, as the same will determine the scale of impact to justify the investments. 
Blended finance is poised to be the way ahead and learnings from the e-BUS deployment in India 
would offer an adequate baseline framework to build upon for financing the ZET pilots. 

  Demand aggregation would prove to be an effective approach to define ZET deployment pilots of 
good  scale,  under  e-FAST,  overcoming  the  financing  challenges  of  fragmented  demand  linked 

pilots  with  individual  shippers.  The  aggregated  numbers  will  help  engage  effectively  with  the 
philanthropic and private sector funds on their interest for supporting the ZET pilots. 

  A  potential  scenario,  similar  to  e-Buses,  of  ZETs  being  profitable  with  the  present  policy 
considerations at a per km basis at a certain scale of deployment in certain sectoral use cases may 
exist, and the same needs to be detailed further to test the adoption potential. 

  With product pipeline visibility as another critical barrier for ZET adoption, convening the product 
OEMs and Shippers/LSPs together for a focused dialogue on the technology roadmap the product 
segments relevant to the planned ZET pilots is an important immediate next step towards ZET 
adoption in the mid-mile and first mile categories. 

  Collaboration  between  key  stakeholders  is  key  to  success  for  ZET  initiatives  in  India,  with 
transparency on individual plans and actions and availability of collaboration platforms as two 
important enablers for the same. 

Note: Some of the takeaways are based upon the research presented by various knowledge partners 
and sets a ground for further discussion and investigation on the topic. 

🌏For further connect and collaboration kindly reach out to  

  Pramod Rajendran (pramod.rajendran@smartfreightcentre.org)  
  Vijay Jaiswal (vijay.jaiswal@smartfreightcentre.org) 

 
 
