Unlocking Your Carrier's 
Electrification Buy-in 
A  Guide  with  the  3rd  Party  Electrification 
Framework 

March 2024 

 
 
 
 
Unlocking  Your  Carrier's  Electrification 
Buy-in 
A Guide with the 3rd Party Electrification Framework 

March 2024 

© Smart Freight Centre, 2024 
Suggested  citation:  Smart  Freight  Centre.  Unlocking  Your  Carrier's  Electrification  Buy-in.  A  Guide with  the  3rd 
Party Electrification Framework. 2024. 
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in any form for educational or non-profit purposes without special permission from 
the copyright holder, provided acknowledgment of the source is made. Smart Freight Centre would appreciate receiving a copy of any 
publication that uses ‘Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in' as a source.  No use of this publication may be made for resale or 
for any other commercial purpose whatsoever, without prior permission in writing from Smart Freight Centre. 

Disclaimer 
The views expressed in this publication are those of Smart Freight Centre and staff, consultants and management, and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the Board of Trustees of Smart Freight Centre. Smart Freight Centre does not guarantee the accuracy of the data 
included in this publication and does not accept responsibility for consequence of their use. 

Acknowledgements 
This report was written by Tharsis Teoh and Priyansh Doshi of Smart Freight Centre.  
We  extend  our  sincere  gratitude  to  the  working  members  of  the  Road  Freight  Electrification  Guidance  project,  and  especially  to  the 
following individuals and organizations for their real-world stories of electrification:  
▪  Pieter Leonard of Colruyt Group; 
▪  Rebeca Cruz Mendoza, Katie Deats-Johnson, Claudia Graf-Schmied of ALDI South Group;  
▪  Oliver Berger and Sara Burkard of Daimler Truck; 
▪  Matilda Eriksson and Amanda Molina Zoppas of Scania. 

Many thanks to Darren Newman of Low Carbon Truck Consultancy and Chris Saxe of Zeus Labs, for their feedback on an earlier version 
of this document. 

About Smart Freight Centre 
Smart Freight Centre is an international non-profit organization focused on reducing greenhouse gas emissions from freight transportation. 
Smart Freight Centre’s vision is an efficient and zero emission global logistics sector. Smart Freight Centre’s mission is to collaborate with 
the organization’s global partners to quantify impacts, identify solutions, and propagate logistics decarbonization strategies. Smart Freight 
Centre’s goal is to guide the global logistics industry in tracking and reducing the industry’s greenhouse gas emissions by one billion 
tonnes by 2030 and to reach zero emissions by 2050 or earlier, consistent with a 1.5°C future. 

Contact 
Smart Freight Centre 
Keizersgracht 560, 1017 EM, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
P.O. Box 11772, 1001 GT, Amsterdam, Netherlands 
Tel office: +31 6 4695 4405 
www.smartfreightcentre.org 
info@smartfreightcentre.org      

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Contents 

Executive Summary 

Glossary 

1 

2 

Introduction 

3rd Party Electrification Framework 

Building a Vision for Electrification 

3 

4 

5 

Internal electrification alignment 

Understanding carriers through dialogue 

Double-loop learning in electrification 

Creating a Supportive Partnership Model 

6 

7 

Attracting the right carriers 

Enhancing contracts for electrification 

Providing Operational Support 

8 

Cooperating through digital integration 

9  Optimizing carriers' charging strategies 

10  Support for vehicle acquisition 

Conclusion 

11  Scaling the e-trucking industry together 

Notes 

5 

7 

8 

10 

13 

14 

15 

16 

19 

20 

21 

23 

24 

25 

26 

28 

29 

31 

3 

  
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Tables 

Table 1 Opportunities for digital integration in support of electrification 

24 

Figures 

8 
Figure 1 Sales and sales shares of zero-emission light, medium and heavy trucks in Europe 
Figure  2 Interplay between internal alignment,  actions to understand carriers, and  double-loop 
11 
learning towards a shared understanding and vision of electrification 
12 
Figure 3 3rd Party Electrification Framework 
14 
Figure 4 Alignment across departments 
15 
Figure 5 Communication approaches tailored to function and context 
16 
Figure 6 Double-loop learning 
16 
Figure 7 Types of learning channels 
20 
Figure 8 Use carrier selection criteria in different modes of communication with carriers 
20 
Figure 9 Example criteria to provide a clear description of a carrier's electrification journey 
21 
Figure 10 Elements within the contract lifecycle that supports electrification. 
22 
Figure 11 Operationally efficient: charging-while-loading! 
25 
Figure 12 Charging strategies, descriptions, and purpose 
26 
Figure 13 Vehicle acquisition support measures 
27 
Figure 14 eActros charged at Wörth plant 
29 
Figure 15 Mutual reinforcement of each element in the framework. 

4 

  
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Executive Summary 

Road  freight  accounts  for  a  significant  portion  of  global  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  posing  a 
substantial  challenge  to  achieving  climate  goals.  E-trucks  offer  a  promising  solution,  reducing 
emissions dramatically. However, wider adoption faces hurdles due to: 
▪  Market uncertainty: Carriers hesitate due to concerns about long-term market stability and 

the evolving ecosystem. 

▪  Knowledge gaps: Operating e-trucks requires new skills and strategies, which carriers lack 

and need to learn. 

▪  Limited  resources: Early-stage  experimentation  comes  with 

financial  and  resource 

constraints that carriers struggle with. 

Despite  significant  influence  on  demand  ("pull-effect"),  freight  buyers  have  been  surprisingly 
overlooked in their potential to drive the electrification of the trucking industry. Traditionally, "push-
effects"  from  solution  providers  and  policies  have  been  emphasized.  However,  customers 
ultimately determine market demand, making freight buyers key players in shaping the service 
landscape. While acknowledging the roles of others, this highlights the crucial and underestimated 
power of freight buyers in accelerating electrification. 
This document empowers freight buyers, with their significant influence, to become key drivers 
of  carrier  electrification.  It  introduces  the  3rd  Party  Electrification  Framework  (3PEF),  a 
comprehensive  guide  for  freight  buyers  to  engage  carriers  and  overcome  these  challenges. 
Interspersed between the framework description are stories of decarbonization leaders who have 
taken the initiative to support their carriers proactively in the joint electrification journey. 

3rd Party Electrification Framework (3PEF) 

The 3PEF is underpinned by three driving questions: 
▪  What  actions  are  necessary  to  ensure  that  freight  buyers  and  carriers  are  aligned  with  the 

same vision? 

▪  How to establish an effective and efficient partnership model? 
▪  What are operational ways to support carriers? 

These  questions  lead  to  three  parts  of  the  framework,  each  with  its  own  objectives  and 
recommendations. Organizations seeking to implement the framework should be driven by the 
interplay of these questions rather than the recommendations provided here. 

Building a Vision of Electrification 

Alignment  between  freight  buyers  and  carriers  on  the  vision  of  electrification  is  essential  to 
working  effectively  together.  Freight  buyers  seeking  to  accelerate  fleet  electrification  must 
navigate  the  challenge  of  bridging  divergent  perspectives  on  anticipated  outcomes  and  the 
electrification process itself.  
The 3PEF framework addresses these critical areas through three key actions: 
▪ 

Internal Electrification Alignment: Ensure internal stakeholders across departments share 
a unified understanding and commitment to the electrification vision. 

▪  Understanding  Carriers  through  Dialogue:  Establish  open  communication  channels  with 
carriers to gather insights and tailor engagement strategies based on their unique needs and 
concerns. 

▪  Double-Loop Learning in Electrification: Foster a collaborative learning environment where 
knowledge  and  information  are  freely  shared,  enabling  all  parties  to  adapt  and  evolve 
alongside the dynamic e-truck ecosystem. 

5 

  
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Creating a Supportive Partnership Model 

Building strong partnerships with carriers is crucial after establishing alignment and action plans. 
This requires a shift from traditional buyer-seller dynamics to a true collaborative model. Freight 
buyers  must  actively  select  and  guide  suitable  partners,  focusing  on  supplier  selection  and 
contract negotiations for maximum impact. 
The 3PEF addresses these critical areas through two key actions: 
▪  Attracting the Right Carriers: Seek partners committed to electrification and possessing the 
capabilities to navigate this transition through carefully selected criteria communicated in the 
sourcing process.  

▪  Enhancing Contracts for Electrification: Craft contracts that incentivize and support carrier 

investment in e-trucks, addressing factors like charging infrastructure and risk sharing. 

Providing Operational Support 

After solidifying partnerships, freight buyers and carriers can move towards collaborative efforts. 
While beneficial contract terms might suffice for some carriers, many may need further support 
resembling pseudo-vertical integration. This strategic collaboration creates an electric transport 
network  with  the  benefits  of  vertical  integration  without  ownership  mergers.  It  offers  mutual 
advantages  like  improved  coordination,  risk  sharing,  resource  provision,  and  a  learning 
environment for both parties. 
Three key areas for collaboration addressed in the 3PEF: 
▪  Cooperating  through  Digital  Integration:  Streamline  information  flow  and  improve 
coordination by integrating freight buyer and carrier systems unlocks benefits of e-trucks and 
helps overcome operational barriers. 

▪  Optimizing  Carriers'  Charging  Strategies:  Facilitate  access  to  charging  services  via 
partnerships, on-site facilities, or co-development ventures with other stakeholders to enable 
the most beneficial charging strategies.  

▪  Support for Vehicle Acquisition: Offer financial assistance or partnerships to help carriers 

acquire e-trucks, exploring various ownership models. 

Scaling Up Together 

By implementing the 3PEF and actively collaborating with other stakeholders, freight buyers can 
become leaders in nurturing the e-trucking market. This begins with consistently addressing 
carrier needs, updating procurement policies to incentivize electrification, and fostering learning 
initiatives  that  attract  and  retain  engaged  partners.  Sharing  best  practices  and  leveraging 
collective strength alongside other freight buyers creates a ripple effect, amplifying the impact 
of these efforts. 
But  the  ripple  effect  does  not  stop  there.  Synergies  naturally  emerge  between  individual 
electrification efforts, encouraging organizations to join forces and tackle shared challenges 
like  charging  infrastructure  development  and  financing  mechanisms.  Existing  initiatives  like 
demand signaling, shared infrastructure development, and joint financing exemplify the power of 
collaboration in overcoming hurdles. 
The  combined  force  of  leadership  and  collaboration  drives  a  significant  acceleration  in 
demand  for  e-truck  services.  This  surge  in  demand  fuels  the  establishment  of  a  robust  and 
continually  innovative  market for zero-emission  logistics solutions. Market growth is driven  not 
only by societal and legislative pressures to decarbonize, but also by the growing availability and 
demand for these services. As a result, most carriers are incentivized to transition away from 
fossil-fuel  vehicles.  This  marks  a  significant  shift  towards  the  dominance  of  low-carbon 
solutions, actively mitigating the climate impact of road freight transportation. 

6 

  
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Glossary 

Carriers: Organizations or individuals who provide freight transportation services. 
Carrier selection criteria: Specific factors or attributes used to evaluate and choose carriers or 
logistics  partners,  often  based  on  performance,  capabilities,  and  alignment  with  organizational 
goals. 
Charging  services:  Facilities  or  infrastructure  for  recharging  electric  vehicles,  often  including 
charging stations and related services. 
Charging strategy: A plan or approach for managing the charging of electric vehicles, including 
factors such as timing, location, and frequency of charging. 
Contract lifecycle: The stages involved in the creation, negotiation, execution, performance, and 
termination of a contract, from initiation to closure. 
Double-loop learning: A learning process that involves questioning and challenging underlying 
assumptions,  values,  and  mental  models,  leading  to  fundamental  changes  in  thinking  and 
behavior. 
E-trucking industry: Shortened form of electric trucking industry, which refers to the segment of 
the trucking industry transports goods using electric trucks.  
Freight buyers: Organizations or individuals who purchase freight transportation services. 
Framework:  A  structured  set  of  concepts,  principles,  or  guidelines  used  to  address  complex 
issues or achieve specific objectives. 
Grid access: The ability to connect to and utilize the electrical grid for charging electric vehicles 
or accessing electricity. 
Market demand: The total quantity of a good or service that consumers are willing and able to 
purchase at a given price. 
Mental models: Internal representations or cognitive frameworks that individuals use to interpret 
information and guide their behavior. 
Opportunity charging: Charging an electric vehicle whenever the opportunity arises, such as 
during scheduled stops or breaks in operations. 
Procurement processes: The procedures and methods used by organizations to acquire goods 
or services, often involving sourcing, negotiation, and contract management. 
Pseudo-vertical  integration:  Strategic  collaboration  among  companies  to  achieve  benefits 
similar to vertical integration without merging or acquiring other entities. 
Pull-effect: The influence of freight buyers on market demand, driving the  electrification of the 
trucking industry by expressing preferences for sustainable transportation solutions. 
Push-effect:  Influence  exerted  by  solution  providers  and  policies  to  promote  the  adoption  of 
electric trucking, traditionally emphasized over the role of freight buyers. 
Scope  2  emissions:  Indirect  greenhouse  gas  emissions  associated  with  the  generation  of 
electricity consumed by an organization. 
Socio-technical  transition:  A  process  involving  changes  in  both  social  practices  and 
technological systems. 
Telematics systems: Technology that combines telecommunications and informatics to send, 
receive, and store information about vehicles' location, movements, and diagnostics. 
Total cost of ownership: An evaluation method that considers all costs associated with owning 
and operating a vehicle over its lifetime, including purchase price, maintenance, and fuel. 
Vehicle acquisition: The process of acquiring vehicles, which may involve purchasing, leasing, 
or other arrangements. 

7 

  
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

1 

Introduction 

The  Unlocking  Your  Carrier's  Electrification  Buy-in  guide  is  part  of  Smart  Freight  Centre's 
collection of resources on road freight electrification.  

Electric trucks (e-trucks) significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions in road freight, achieving 
up  to  an  85%  emission  intensity  reduction  in  regions  with  low-carbon  electricityi.  Total  cost  of 
ownership  analysis  indicates  e-trucks  are  becoming  cost-competitive  with  conventional  diesel 
trucksii.  Despite  this,  e-trucks  remain  a  niche  technology  used  in  freight,  constituting  a  small 
percentage of overall sales (Figure 1). Various technical, operational, financial, and infrastructural 
challenges  act  as  barriers  to  wider  adoptioniii.  Many  of  these  challenges,  such  as  low  vehicle 
model variety and charging infrastructure availability, are critical barriers but are only short term 
features of the market. Some of these challenges stem from the entrenched dominance of internal 
combustion engine truck technology, creating a significant market lock-in.  

Figure  1  Sales  and  sales  shares  of  zero-emission  light,  medium  and  heavy  trucks  in 
Europeiv  

Transitioning  from  this  lock-in  poses  disruptions  to  carriers'  business  models  and  wider 
repercussions  for  the  logistics  sector,  which  can  explain  the  inertia  and  hesitation  of  the 
characteristically  risk-averse  road  freight  sectorv.  The  current  (innovation)  state  is  difficult  to 
navigate not only because of the existing challenges but also because of the uncertainty of how 
the ecosystem that e-truck operations rely on will develop, and whether there will be continued 
market demand for electric trucking (e-trucking) services. The uncertainty hampers decisions that 
need  to  be  made  now,  namely  those  that  enable  the  sector  to  learn  how  to  create  and  run  a 
transport business using e-trucks.  
While it is uncertain how this may look once e-trucks become mainstream, in the transition stage, 
it  is  expected  that  carriers  will  need  more  than  the  usual  support  from  the  freight  ecosystem: 
vehicle  and  charging  suppliers,  policymakers,  and  freight  buyers.  This  document  represents  a 
step towards helping the last group mentioned in that list, the freight buyers, define a systematic 
support strategy to nudge carriers towards providing or scaling up e-trucking services.  

8 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Critical conditions to enable carriers to transition 

Before  diving  into  the  description  of  the  framework  let’s  outline  the  main  challenges  faced  by 
carriers in the early adoption stage. The themes outlined here lean heavily on the literature on 
innovation transitions and studies conducted on carrier decarbonizationvi,vii,viii,ix,x. 
▪  Carriers  seek  assurances  for  the  long-term  development  of  a  stable  market. 
Transitioning carriers are embarking on a potentially significant overhaul of their business and 
operating  model  and  may  need  to  invest  heavily  in  new  assets  and  business  partnerships. 
While legitimacy derived from he regulatory framework is essential, the long-term profitability 
of  the  business  model  is  primary.  In  this  regard,  both  freight  buyers  and  carriers  must  be 
aligned as to where the early electrification steps are heading.  

▪  Carriers must be equipped with knowledge about running a successful electric freight 
operation  and  business.  Swapping  a  conventional  vehicle  with  an  e-truck  is  not  a  simple 
substitution but involves at the operator level, a variety of new strategies and planning devices, 
including selecting and implementing charging strategy, based on constraints of the  e-truck, 
available charging services, and the transport service parameters. These changes impact the 
co-design of operations with the freight buyer, the viability of the carrier’s business model, and 
the price of services.  

▪  Carriers need starter resources and an experimental environment to enable the required 
learning in the early adopter stage of electrification. Entry to the market is not only defined 
by the significant capital investment but also the need to  learn by doing. Characteristic of a 
socio-technical transition, the technology, businesses, and practices are all developing at the 
same  time.  Until  there  is  some  stability,  carriers  will  need  the  space  (i.e.,  timewise, 
contractually, and financially) to gain a deeper understanding of the new reality.  

None  of  these  challenges  are  insurmountable.  However,  they  do  require  the  proactive 
engagement of more actors than ‘usual’ in the ecosystem. And one of the key stakeholders that 
have both the most influence and can receive the most direct benefit out of the transition, is the 
buyers of logistics services, whether cargo owners or logistics service providers. In this document, 
this group of actors will be collectively referred to as freight buyers.  

Framework for a new carrier engagement strategy  

Among the various stakeholders that have an influence over the ecosystem transition, the one 
whose role has traditionally been underestimated is the role of the freight buyer. However, this is 
a strange phenomenon, especially since in the business relationship between freight buyer and 
carrier,  the  “pull-effect”,  i.e.,  the  influence  of  demand  for  a  service,  is  much  stronger  than  the 
“push-effect”, e.g., the promotion of a service towards a customerxi. It is often the customer that 
defines the environment in which the business and operational relationship takes place. This is 
not to diminish the role of solution providers or policy makers, which enable or even put pressure 
on the provision of services, but ultimately, the market demand for services defines the market 
for service provision.  
Fortunately, freight buyers, as a broad group, are becoming increasingly aware of and engaged 
in  their  role  to  push  for  decarbonization  of  logistics,  thanks  in  part  to  the  few  freight 
decarbonization frontrunners. Nevertheless, a large percentage of organizations - at least 45% 
according to the Decarbonizing Freight 2022 Surveyxii - do not engage with their subcontractors 
to decarbonize their transport operations. The development of a market for service provision will 
require these organizations to be persuaded and to emulate good practices of decarbonization 
leaders.  
The framework presented in this document has been put together to provide freight buyers with 
a feasible means to begin to play their electrification role effectively, that is, to persuade carriers 
to electrify their operations on their behalf. While presented as a framework, these actions can be 
taken individually, depending on the context the organization is in. However, the reason why they 
are put together as a framework is to address the three challenges of a carrier holistically.  
The  next  chapter  presents  this  framework  and  sets  the  stage  for  identifying  what  to  do  in  the 
subsequent chapters.  

9 

  
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

2  3rd Party Electrification Framework 

Freight buyers can drive carrier electrification by gradually integrating the 3rd Party Electrification 
Framework (3PEF) into their essential procurement processes. 

Before delving into the framework's details, let's review the primary challenges encountered by 
carriers in the early adoption phase: 
▪  Market uncertainty: Carriers hesitate due to concerns about long-term market stability and 

the evolving ecosystem. 

▪  Knowledge gaps: Operating e-trucks requires new skills and strategies, which carriers lack 

and need to learn. 

▪  Limited  resources:  Early-stage  experimentation  comes  with  financial  and  resource 

constraints that carriers struggle with. 

These  represent  crucial  conditions  for  the  continued  and  accelerated  adoption  of  e-trucks  by 
carriers. The 3PEF is specifically designed to address these conditions and is built around the 
following key questions:  

What actions are 
necessary to 
ensure that 
freight buyers 
and carriers are 
aligned with the 
same vision?

How can an 
effective and 
efficient 
partnership 
model be 
established?

What are 
operational ways 
to support 
carriers?

While this publication suggests responses to these questions, it is crucial for the implementing 
organization  to  independently  determine  and  consistently  refine  the  best  answers.  The  next 
section presents the rationale behind the questions.  

What actions are necessary to ensure that freight buyers and carriers are 
aligned with the same vision? 

Ensuring  alignment  between  freight  buyers  and  carriers  in  their  electrification  vision  requires 
addressing key aspects. The term 'vision' pertains to how individuals or organizations perceive 
the  electrification  outcomes  and  its  process.  Alignment  on  crucial  elements  is  paramount, 
recognizing that perspectives may differ, encompassing both favorable and unfavorable aspects 
for  freight  buyers  and  carriers.  Achieving  alignment  involves  collaboratively  strategizing  to 
mitigate unfavorable aspects and enhance favorable ones. 
Freight buyers and carriers could also  envision the outcomes differently. For instance, some 
freight buyers may be aiming for exclusive  e-truck-based logistics by 2030, while their carriers 
may see e-trucks as just one emissions reduction option among many or do not see the need to 

10 

  
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

completely electrify so urgently. While complete alignment of the shared outcomes isn't always 
necessary, sufficient overlap is needed to justify mutual support. 
A shared understanding of the electrification process is crucial to avoid misunderstandings. For 
instance, if freight buyers are unaware of the complexities in applying for vehicle subsidies, they 
may harbor unrealistic expectations about the cost of the service. On the carrier side, clarity on 
how to calculate and report logistics emissions from electric vehicles is essential for maximizing 
the emission reduction value proposition, a key reason freight buyers are interested in e-trucks. 
These examples underscore the importance of aligning  the understanding of  the electrification 
process to ensure successful collaboration. 
The  3PEF  introduces  three  concurrent  actions  aimed  at  resolving  misalignments  in 
expectations  and  fostering  the  strategic  and  operational  knowledge  crucial  for  a 
successful partnership and seamless transition (Figure 2). They revolve around a continuous 
learning model, joint-knowledge production, and they take into intra-company dynamics.  

Figure 2 Interplay between internal alignment, actions to understand carriers, and double-
loop learning towards a shared understanding and vision of electrification 
Integrating these three actions in the freight buyer’s engagement strategy  will keep the mental 
models  of  both  internal  and  external  stakeholders  aligned,  as  well  as  ensure  that  the  overall 
knowledge about electrification is kept up to date. These actions pave the way for establishing a 
suitable partnership model and identify necessary areas to collaborate. 
Details about each action are presented in their separate chapters. 
▪ 
▪  Understanding carriers through dialogue 
▪  Double-loop learning in electrification 

Internal electrification alignment 

How to establish an effective and efficient partnership model? 

With aligned mental models and a clear roadmap of actions, the next phase  is to build strong 
partnerships with carriers. In this critical second stage, freight buyers must proactively guide 
the  transformation  of  selected  carriers  into  collaborators.  This  entails  a  reciprocal  shift,  where 
carriers  are  treated  and  function  as  collaborators,  leading  to  freight  buyers  evolving  into 
collaborative  partners,  instead  of  just  clients.  While  acknowledging  the  broader  procurement 
process,  the  3PEF  places  its  primary  emphasis  on  supplier  selection  and  negotiations  on 
contractual  terms.  These  two  steps  are  deemed  the  most  pivotal  within  the  overarching 
procurement processxiii.  
Key questions emerge:  
▪ 
▪  Market  signaling  and  transformation: How  can  we  effectively  attract  and  guide  potential 

Identifying ideal partners: Who aligns with our values and electrification goals? 

partners? 

11 

Organizations progressively align the vision and way of working among key internal stakeholder.Internal alignment on electrificationIntentional, systematic and respectful ways to understand carriers are implemented.Understand carriersCarriers and shippers produce knowledgeand learn together about electrification.Double-loop learningInternal vision and approachrevised according to what isunderstood about carriers.Outdated assumptions about electrification are replaced with new.Needs for learning and new knowledge are identified by understanding carriers.   
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

▪  Mutual  benefit  partnership  model: How  can  we  structure  agreements  that  support  both 

parties' growth? 

▪  Assuring market development and early-stage resources: How can we  provide stability 

and resources during the transition? 

▪  Addressing short-term carrier challenges: What support can we offer in exchange for their 

collaboration? 

These inquiries form the foundation for shaping a partnership that ensures shared success 
in the electrification journey. 
Details about each action are presented in their separate chapters. 
▪  Attracting the right carriers 
▪  Enhancing contracts for electrification 

What are operational ways to support carriers? 

In  the  subsequent  phase,  once  the  formal  partnership  model  is  solidified,  freight  buyers  and 
carriers can begin collaborative efforts. At this juncture, carriers may find beneficial contractual 
terms for e-trucking services sufficient. However, it is more probable that, at this stage, carriers 
will  seek  enhanced  support  resembling  pseudo-vertical  integration.  Pseudo-vertical 
integration  involves  strategic  collaboration  among  companies  to  establish  an  electric  transport 
network  that  replicates  the  advantages  of  vertical  integration  without  actual  mergers  or 
acquisitions.  These  actions  provide  mutual  benefits  to  both  freight  buyer  and  carrier  which 
improves coordination, reduces risks inequality, provides resources, and creates an environment 
for learning by both parties. 
Three  main  areas  have  been  identified  that  provide  a  clear  opportunity  for  collaboration: 
integrating logistics management  systems,  provision of  charging services, and  support 
for  vehicle  acquisition.  These  address  major  barriers  facing  carriers  that  also  are  real-world 
proven models of support. 
Details about each action are presented in their separate chapters. 
▪  Cooperating through digital integration 
▪  Optimizing carriers’ charging strategies 
▪  Support for vehicle acquisition 

Combining the pieces 

The 3PEF provides the freight buyer a clear means to begin their journey of electrifying their 3rd 
party service providers. While each action described above is useful in and of itself, putting them 
together in a cohesive system for engagement amplifies their effectiveness.  

Figure 3 3rd Party Electrification Framework 
The rest of the document presents what organizations can do organized under the three main 
headings described above. These recommendations are not exhaustive and should be taken as 
template for designing an organization’s unique engagement strategy with carriers. 

12 

Internal electrification alignmentUnderstanding carriers through dialogueDouble-loop learning in electrificationBuilding a Vision for ElectrificationAttractingtherightcarriersEnhancingcontractsforelectrificationCreating a Supportive Partnership ModelCooperatingthroughdigitalintegrationOptimizingcarriers’chargingstrategiesSupportforvehicleacquisitionProviding Operational Support  
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Building a Vision for 
Electrification 
What actions are necessary to 
ensure that freight buyers and 
carriers are aligned with the same 
vision?  

13 

  
 
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

3 

Internal electrification alignment  

To  ensure  effective  electrification,  the  organization's  external  engagement  strategy  must 
commence  with  a  cohesive  narrative  that  aligns  with  the  mental  models  of  individuals, 
departments, and implemented business processes.  

The  electrification  of  third-party  logistics  is  a  strategic  decision  with  far-reaching  implications 
across various aspects of a business, impacting departments from supply chain management to 
logistics operations and procurement. Organizations that achieve internal alignment on desired 
outcomes, strategies, and  resource allocation are better positioned to  develop a cohesive and 
effective carrier engagement strategy in the context of electrification initiatives.  

Electrification strategy alignment 

involves  various  organizational 
Electrification 
actors, including sustainability teams, procurement, 
operations and supply chain, sales and marketing, 
and finance and legal. Achieving inter-departmental 
alignment  is  often  challenging,  highlighting  the 
critical role of executive teams. Their responsibility 
is 
“the  company  structure, 
operational  processes,  capital  planning,  and 
internal policies support the transition”xiv. 
To foster alignment, several actions can be taken: 
▪  Creating  a  safe  environment  for  collaboration 

to  ensure 

that 

within and between departmentsxv. 

▪  Conveying  and  co-creating  a  shared  vision  of 
sustainable logistics through the electrification of 
third-party logistics. 
Identifying  actions,  projects,  and  policies  to 
support the shared vision. 

▪ 

▪  Aligning 

performance 
defined actions. 

departmental 
indicators 

and 
(KPIs) 

project 

toward 

key 
the 

Figure 4 Alignment across departments 

Alignment is a continuous process as the understanding of their carriers and fleet electrification 
deepens.  

Carrier engagement strategy alignment 

Beyond  aligning  with  the  overall  strategy,  organizations  should  embrace  a  new  engagement 
paradigm  with  carriers.  Presently,  many  carrier  relationships  are  predominantly  'transactional,' 
particularly  when  centered  on  short-term  contracts  for  transport  services.  As  detailed  in 
subsequent  chapters,  a  recommended  approach  for  the  decarbonization  of  logistics  involves 
adopting  a  collaborative  and  relational  modelxvi.  This  shift  in  relationship  format  serves  as  the 
foundation for building trustxvii, mitigating risks associated with electrification, and facilitating more 
meaningful two-way knowledge sharing.  
Different  departments,  particularly  the  operations  and  procurement  departments  that  typically 
lead  engagement  with  carriers,  will  need  to  be  aligned  on  the  approach  taken,  especially 
considering their understanding of carriers.  
By starting small and gradually expanding,  organizations can incrementally  improve alignment 
and  communication,  ultimately  working  towards  broader  and  more  comprehensive  alignment 
across teams and departments. 

14 

  
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

4  Understanding carriers through dialogue 

Electrification necessitates more in-depth conversations - updating and aligning mental models 
of both freight buyers and carriers. 

The widespread use of e-trucks by carriers is changing the transport service market in ways that 
are hard to predict. This is happening alongside ongoing trends like a shortage of laborxviii and 
stricter public policies. Even assumptions about the transport sector before COVID-19 that were 
considered  safe  may  no  longer  be  valid,  as  industry  and  economy  have  faced  significant 
geopolitical crises. Freight buyers planning to electrify their carriers need to stay informed about 
the sector and specifically their carriers because the situation is evolving. 

Building towards two-way communication  

The current norm  involves transactional communication between freight buyers and carriers  in 
the context of operational planning, sales, and procurement. Electrification necessitates more in-
depth conversations, even if time-consuming, fostering understanding and collaboration. Buyers 
electrifying carriers must understand the market, especially with small and medium-sized carriers. 
Effective  communication  towards  carriers  involves  sharing  visions  and  assumptions  about 
electrification,  testing  ideas,  and  signaling  intentions.  While  challenging,  a  favorable  outcome 
would be for alignment between both freight buyers’ and carriers’ mental modelsxix with respect 
to the end state and process of electrification. 
To  initiate  the  process,  clearly  convey  the  organization's  vision  for  electrifying  the  road  freight 
sector, extending beyond environmental performance to include carriers' evolving roles and well-
being.  Additionally,  emphasize  to  carriers  that  the  collected  information  will  be  utilized 
productively,  generating  present  value,  particularly  through  survey  results  that  enhance  their 
understanding of the carrier market. This communication signals a transition from transactional to 
collaborative engagement.  
With that in place, other types of communication approaches (Figure 5) could be tailored to fit the 
situation. 

Workshop and focus groups

Town hall meeting

Anonymized surveys

• Small number of carriers, specific 

questions, physical or virtual locations

• Creates rich information, builds 

stronger relationships, suitable for 
sensitive information when involving a 
single party

• Medium number of carriers, physical 

• High number of carriers, widespread 

setting

• Facilitates two-way communication of 
more superficial information, suitable 
for introductions and networking

geographic location, third-party 
neutral survey company needed

• Potential for rich information in terms 
of breadth, sensitive information can 
be pseudonymized, 

• Low response rate possible unless 

tied with incentives

Figure 5 Communication approaches tailored to function and context 

Maintaining dialogue 

To  improve  communication  quality  and  maintain  the  dialogue  in  the  long  term.  The  following 
strategies can be used.  
▪  Create value based on the dialogue for the active (and passive) network, such as sharing the 

learnings or case studies through a publication. 

▪  Create an environment where individuals feel comfortable sharing their ideas and concerns 

without fear of judgment or repercussions – socially or commerciallyxx. 

▪  Allocate  time  and  resources  for  hosting  events,  training  and  implementing  technology  to 

enhance and improve communication. 

▪  Nudge  carriers  to  participate  in  the  events.  Be  transparent  about  the  role  of  these 

communication channels, while stressing the importance and benefits of participating. 

15 

  
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

5  Double-loop learning in electrification 

Navigating  electrification's  early  stages  requires  double  loop  learning  for  freight  buyers  and 
carriers, integrating mental models and decision-making rules into the adaptive process.  

Staying abreast of the rapid evolution of e-truck technology, charging infrastructure, and business 
practices,  while  ensuring  alignment  with  each  other,  will  provide  a  competitive  edge  for  both 
freight  buyers  and  carriers.  Firsthand  learning  by  both  parties,  therefore,  becomes  primary, 
enabled by the provision of resources and space for real-world experiments that freight buyers 
can provide. 

Double-loop learning  

Freight  buyers  and  carriers  shape  electric  freight 
operations  together.  As  electrification  enhances  and 
constrains  service  parameters  set  by  buyers  and 
transport services offered by carriers, both parties must 
engage  in  double-loop  learning  that  continuously 
updates  assumptions  and  values  that  go  into  design 
and decision makingxxi.  
Some  aspects  expected  to  evolve  with  e-truck  use 
include  transport  service  description,  compensation, 
buyer  support,  and  evaluation  criteria  for  supplier 
selection, and contract management. 

Learning channels 

Figure 6 Double-loop learning 

Freight buyers, especially if the trust between buyer and carriers are high, can play an active role 
to facilitate learning, especially by engaging with trusted 3rd parties, such as universities and non-
governmental organizations. It is helpful to distinguish between three types of learning channels 
that could be adopted depending on the function, context, and available resources.  
These are presented here in decreasing order of priority and present need.  

Real-world Testing

• Offers firsthand experience with operational solutions
• Demonstrations within research projects, operational pilots, or living labs
• Typically preceded by in-depth planning, design and evaluation

Firsthand Experience 
Exchange

• Peer-to-peer sharing of learnings from demonstrations and experiments
• Credibility of peers lends to high confidence in shared knowledge
• Instills confidence and helps prevent costly mistakes

• Equips organizations with aggregated knowledge from various firsthand and secondhand 

sources

Training

• Through written or verbal communication: leaflets, in-house or third-party training
• Highly standardized knowledge, often remains superficial, and can become quickly 

outdated. 

Figure 7 Types of learning channels 
Organizations  need  to  recognize  that  the  ‘new’  information  is  added  to  the  existing  pool  of 
knowledge of the individual, within  their organization, and within the sector.  Resistance to new 
knowledge at various levels necessitates a strategic learning approach to ensure that the quality 
of the pooled knowledge continually improvesxxii.  
Embedding  learning  in  the  engagement  strategy,  particularly  through  partnerships  with  freight 
electrification associations, will greatly benefit the road freight sector and electrification ecosystem 
by 
to  policymakers, 
manufacturers, and infrastructure providers.  

industry  skill  development,  providing  valuable 

fostering 

insights 

16 

Information FeedbackDecisionReal-worldMental modelDecision-makingrules  
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Zero emission transport community building 
with Colruyt 

Colruyt is steadfast in its commitment to achieving zero-emission logistics operations by 2035 
through strategic partnerships with subcontractors, transitioning to electric and hydrogen fuel 
cell trucks. During a December 2022 event hosted by Colruyt, which brought together 150 small 
and  large  trucking  companies,  including  subcontracted  transport  partners,  the  company 
unveiled  its  proactive  approach  towards  phased  electrification,  offering  valuable  insights  for 
other organizations. 
The company initiated its pilot phase by experimenting with various e-trucks, conducting tests 
over a 3-to-4-year period.  This phase involved a collaborative  learning process  drawing  and 
sharing insights from the experiments. 
In  the  subsequent  preparation  phase,  spanning  up  to  4  years,  Colruyt  plans  to  make  early 
investments based on the lessons learned, await improved products, and explore the economic 
aspects of the transition. Colruyt is dedicated to supporting subcontractors in their successful 
transition by providing operational support, including charging infrastructure and investments. 
The company also facilitates the shift to e-trucks by aiding carriers in vehicle acquisition through 
joint truck procurement. 
In the final adoption phase, Colruyt is committed to an incremental implementation of a zero-
emission fleet. The initial transition of the company's internal fleet to a zero-emission fleet is set 
to occur by 2030, followed by the entire fleet, including partnered carriers, by 2035.  
Such  events,  coupled  with  unwavering  commitments  and  continuous  communication,  foster 
strong  trust  and  relationships  among  transport  stakeholders,  a  critical  element  for  resilience 
during the transition period. By signaling that Colruyt will take the lead in decarbonization while 
also supporting their carriers through the transition, they instill confidence in trucking companies 
to trust Colruyt and become more open to experimenting with the technology.  

17 

  
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Piloting Sustainable Technologies at ALDI 
SOUTH Group 

ALDI SOUTH Group has implemented strategic and systematic learning to lay the foundation 
for a smooth sustainable transportation journey in each country where they operate. ALDI South 
Group has defined global sustainability targets. While each individual country is responsible for 
ensuring the targets are met, a central Supply Chain team provides support to all countries. The 
central team is focusing on global coordination, knowledge sharing, creating global partnership, 
and more, all to ensure they are benefitting from synergies and making sure all countries are 
working  in  the  same  direction.  The  country  teams  support  with  understanding  local 
requirements, site specific details, and many other topics. The collaboration of central and local 
teams allows for them to ensure they are looking at the full picture and progressing towards the 
overall ambition: reducing the company carbon footprint.  
As  part  of  this  focus,  they  have  investigated  many  technologies,  including  electric  vehicles, 
which are the focus of this case study. The ambition is to understand the feasibility of electric 
vehicles within their supply chain and the associated challenges.  Urgent topics that need to be 
addressed  include  understanding  the  benefits  and  drawbacks  of  the  various  sustainable 
transportation  options,  maturity  of  market  participants  and  partners  within  the  electrification 
realm, and the limitations of all the various grids within Europe. Their approach aims to test new 
technologies within the various regions, compile learnings, and share a best approach to each 
country  while  considering  their  unique  market  requirements  and  stages  of  technology 
development.  
One  of  the  main  challenges  that  they  have  recently  investigated  was  how  to  overcome 
challenges to provide charging infrastructure- which currently faces structural barriers (e.g. grid 
capacity), lot size limitations and operational requirements, and significant capital expenditure 
to retrofit facilities.  They carried out two separate pilots in two different regions to test different 
types of charging solutions.  
The summary of the pilots is presented below. Both pilots were used for trucks servicing their 
outbound flows (from regional distribution centers to stores). 

Both  trials  are  helpful  to  understand  more  about  the  capabilities  of  an  e-truck  without  the 
implications  of  high  investments  in  charging  infrastructure  or  truck  trials.  The  business  is 
strategically researching and piloting various set ups to ensure the country teams have a variety 
of  decarbonising  options  available,  such  as  rental  constructs,  truck-as-a-service  model,  and 
others. 
However, there are still major challenges to electrification, namely that any impact on logistics 
costs can impact other aspects of the business. Challenges range from scalability of  e-trucks 
due to grid capacity constraints and projections of truck availability not matching the demand, 
to significantly longer refuelling times when compared to standard diesel operations and a more 
limited range.  
The  ALDI  SOUTH  Group  continues  to  share  learnings  among  its  national  teams,  and  will 
continue to develop its organizational structure to support effective and cost-efficient learning 
between the central, the regions, and carrier networks serving the different locations. 

18 

Region 2Region 1The ALDI country made an agreement with a stationary charging network operator to help carriers charge their trucks.The carrier used a mobile electric charger to charge its trucksCharging Solution-Eliminates the high investment required to develop charging infrastructure.-Requires less space at the warehouse.Benefits  
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Creating a Supportive 
Partnership Model 
How can an effective and efficient 
partnership model be established?  

19 

  
 
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

6  Attracting the right carriers 

Organizations  can  embed  expectations  early  into  the  existing  procurement  processes,  using 
carrier selection criteria, which is a high impact and cost-effective way to kick start electrification. 

Freight  buyers,  armed  with  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  the  steps  they  should  take  to 
electrify, as well as a realistic understanding of what is feasible in the existing carrier market, can 
leverage  their  insights  to  articulate  criteria  for  selecting  partners,  described  here  as  carrier 
selection criteria.  

Amplify criteria across all engagement channels for emphasis.  

Using  carrier  selection  criteria  in  the  logistics  partner  sourcingxxiii  provides  a  clear  target  for 
carriers to aim for. By embedding expectations early into the procurement process, organizations 
create a strong link between their stated ambitions and the types of carriers they are looking to 
partner with. Strive for coherent message from private policy documents to the enforcement of 
the criteria.  

Promote vision of the industry as a general carrier policy or Third-Party Code of Conduct.

• Establish the framework for collaboration, narrowing down applications to carriers demonstrating both interest and qualification. 

Articulate a comprehensive vision statement for the industry and potential partners, encompassing elements like:
• Environmental KPIs that are used internally for the logistics procurement department.
• Public commitments, such as done within the EV100+ and First Movers Coalition.
• Sustainable logistics roadmap or ambitions. 
• Social sustainability aspects, such as commitment to fair pay or better working conditions in alignment with CSR Europe's Truck 

Transport Social Guidelines. 

Be transparent about criteria used to obtain environmental performance desired

• Aim to not only successfully procure services, but to also provide a clear demand signal to the industry and to open high-quality 

lines of communication with the industry to aid electrification. 
• Communicate explicitly your organization’s environmental criteria in any procurement Request-For documents. 
• In the early phases, allow for information sessions for carriers to understand the changes to past practices and to offer feedback. 
• Take their feedback into consideration to revise the Request-For documents (see Section 4), as well as the contract terms (see 

Section 7).

Monitor and enforce the criteria in the on-going relationship

• Embed double loop learning in the monitoring and enforcing practices, while maintaining commitment to the terms of the 

agreements.
• Embed the terms in the contract.
• Revise the criteria depending on feedback from the logistics and sustainability team.

Figure 8 Use carrier selection criteria in different modes of communication with carriers 

Embed electrification needs in the criteria. 

After  receiving  responses  from  carriers,  the  procurement  department  assesses  each  using 
predefined  criteria  (Figure  9).  Organizations  should  allow  carriers  to  provide  information  on 
needed support, which could be part of the commitment offered by the freight buyer.  

General environmental 
performance

Improvement in 
environmental performance

Allocation of environmental 
attributes to the shipper

Support needed for 
electrification

• Number of e-trucks in the 

fleet.

• Ratio of e-trucks to own 

charging points

• Certified fleet emissions 

intensity

• Past and planned growth 

of e-trucks in the fleet
• Improvement of fleet 
emissions intensity 
compared to the previous 
year and planned over the 
next years.

• Availability of e-trucks to 
be used in the shipper’s 
operation.

• Certified fleet emissions 
intensity assigned to the 
shipper’s operation

• Charging infrastructure 

needs

Figure 9 Example criteria to provide a clear description of a carrier's electrification journey 
Threshold values that both reflect regional maturity and encourage growth could be used in the 
evaluation. These criteria should work alongside  other criteria used to assess logistics service 
quality. 

20 

  
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

7  Enhancing contracts for electrification 

Organizations can leverage these contract terms to show tangible commitment to electrification, 
while supporting this growing and maturing service sector.  

In  fostering  electrification  and  ensuring  logistics  performance  through  carrier  agreements, 
organizations must experiment to optimize their critical elements: the purchased transport service, 
service level, and environmental performance, along with financial terms. 

Redesign contract lifecycle and terms. 

To  optimize  carrier  agreements  for  electrification  and  improved  logistics  performance,  freight 
buyers  should  start  by  strategically  considering  using  e-trucks  in  a  transport  service  as  an 
opportunity rather than just a constraint. In this approach, freight buyers can make electric freight 
operations  appealing  through  attractive  freight  rates,  longer  and  more  stable  contracts,  and 
tailored  assistance  for  electrification.  When  both  parties  have  a  long-term  perspective,  freight 
buyers can incorporate clauses that specifically address the scale-up of electrification over the 
contracting period. The goal is to gently guide partners towards the right direction without causing 
long-term harm, balancing the short-term needs of the freight buyer.  

Designing Transport Request 
based on what the E-truck 
affords:

• Implement e-trucks for intermodal 

first/last mile. 

• Optimize activities for e-trucks: 

consolidate shipments, optimize routes, 
lead time. 

• Redesign networks, create urban 

consolidation centers. 

• Why: Shippers should start with the 

best e-truck applications to get carriers 
started. 

Adjusting Freight Rate for E-
truck-based Transport:
• Methods include adding an emissions 

reduction value ($/ kg CO2) or 
estimating the Total Cost of Ownership 
(TCO) differential between e-trucks and 
diesel trucks.

• Why: Reflecting a fair premium for 
electrification acknowledges the 
increased value of the service and 
compensates for the unique category of 
e-truck-based services.

Providing Stability of Transport 
Service Demand

• Negotiations may involve longer 

contracting periods and stable transport 
volumes.

• Why: e-truck investments require 

longer payback periods, and stable 
contracts help carriers with credit 
scores and contract searches.

Committing to Optimize 
Operations with Current E-truck 
Capabilities:
• Negotiations around service levels align 

with technology immaturity.

• Examples include priority and flexible 

rescheduling at loading bays to 
optimize e-truck use and charging 
activity.

• Why: Considering the growing 

competence of e-truck technology, 
flexibility in operations eases anxiety for 
e-truck operators.

Allowing for a Reasonably-Paced 
Transition, if Necessary:
• Phasing in e-truck adoption for specific 
transport operations and the carrier's 
fleet.

• Compensation should align with actual 

performance.

• Why: Guides carriers to transition 

financially stable and avoids abrupt, 
unwise adoption of e-trucks from both 
shipper and carrier perspectives.

Figure 10 Elements within the contract lifecycle that supports electrification. 

Nudge carriers towards terms that align with internal priorities. 

While conventional transport contracts primarily involve monetary transactions for services, the 
landscape  shifts  in  electrification.  In  this  context,  where  freight  buyers  actively  contribute  to  a 
carrier's  business  model  transformation,  their  role  extends  beyond  the  norm.  Therefore,  it 
becomes imperative for freight buyers to ensure that contractual terms safeguard their interests, 
particularly in bolstering future electrification endeavors. This could include:  
▪  securing detailed emissions and energy data for an enhanced emission reduction roadmap,  
▪ 
▪  aiding procurement with comprehensive cost data. 

facilitating operational learning about electric vehicles that can be transferred to other carriers,  

This, however, necessitates deep trust and legal protections between both parties. 

21 

  
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Towards normalizing electric road freight 
procurement at Scania 

Scania has the vision to drive the shift towards a sustainable transport system. The company 
sees electrification as an important part of its sustainability journey. The first step Scania has 
taken in this journey has been to develop a company-level electrification strategy. Based on the 
strategy, further initiatives and actions will be taken.  

One  key  aspect  Scania  has  addressed  is  the  question  of  how  to  integrate  procurement  of 
electric  road  freight  services  into  its  usual  procurement  processes.  To  develop  a  deeper 
understanding,  the  company  conducted  a  pilot  on  one  of  its  inbound  transport  lanes  in 
Södertälje, Sweden. The approach taken had five main steps and ended with a detailed post-
pilot evaluation of the learnings.  

The first step in the pilot involved identifying a suitable transport flow to electrify. Scania’s team 
has  identified  one  transport  flow  with  a  short  distance  and  a  high  volume  of  goods,  which 
represents the highest potential of feasibility for electrification and simplicity of use in the pilot. 
Moreover, the company has performed a detailed analysis of the driving capability of the vehicle 
while simultaneously identifying when and where the vehicle would need to be charged.  

Based on this analysis, Scania was able to be concrete about the demand for the transport flow, 
request  that  within  a  tender,  and  issue  a  request  for  quotation.  The  request  for  quotation 
included electrification and charging station requirements. The process for signing on a carrier 
was  successful.  Negotiation  with  the  carrier 
resulted in a clearer understanding of the route 
the  vehicle  needed  to  take  and  the  charging 
station  requirements.  Before  implementation, 
Scania  and  the  selected  carrier  performed  a 
vehicle simulation. The simulation helped ensure 
the  vehicle  and  charging 
and  assure 
that 
infrastructure  could  perform 
transport 
required  and  that  the  supply  to  the  production 
line  would  not  be  impacted.  With  the  pre-work 
done, the implementation of the pilot went well, 
resulting in learnings for both Scania, as freight 
buyer, and for the carrier involved in the project.  

Figure 11 Operationally efficient: 
charging-while-loading! 

the 

A critical consideration that determined the success of the  pilot was  identifying collaborative 
and forward-looking carriers that would be in line with Scania’s way of working. Scania, while 
willing  to  support  carriers,  was  clear  that  carriers  needed  to  contribute  to  a  successful 
collaboration in the pilot. For instance, in this pilot, the carriers were expected to provide their 
charging infrastructure. In addition, Scania provided the carrier with priority for loading slots to 
help maintain operational efficiency and reduce the impact of any transport delays. 

Scania’s  pilot  was  very  successful,  for  both  them  and  the  carrier.  Taking  an  incremental 
approach to slowly build up competence and design a new electric road freight business model 
was very successful. One critical challenge that remains is to get buy-in from carriers at an early 
stage, as well as to perform a rigorous analysis of transport flows that fit the EV and charging 
infrastructure profile. 

22 

  
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Providing Operational 
Support 
What are operational ways to 
support carriers? 

23 

  
 
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

8  Cooperating through digital integration 

Developing  a  digital  integration  strategy  is  pivotal  for  advancing  electrification  efforts  and 
optimizing logistics operations.  

Digital  integration  in  road  freight,  a  longstanding  strategy  to  mitigate  operational  risks  and 
inefficiencies, encounters added complexity and urgency with the introduction of electric vehicles 
and  charging  infrastructure.  This  necessitates  enhanced  communication  and  data-driven 
decision-making, ultimately building resilience into e-truck-based logistics operations. 

Supporting electrification through digital technology. 

Within the logistics domain, multiple digital management systems, including fleet, transport, and 
warehouse  management,  coexist.  The  ongoing  technological  progress  aims  to  integrate  these 
systems,  enhancing  visibility  and  decision-making  capabilities,  particularly  in  responding  to 
disruptions. Despite advancements, industry implementation still lags. The integration of electric 
vehicles, equipped with telematics systems, and charging infrastructure, incorporating payment 
and reservation systems, remains an outstanding challenge.  
Below,  we  outline  potential  opportunities  arising  from  integration  or  data  analysis  within  this 
context.  

Table 1 Opportunities for digital integration in support of electrification 

Opportunities  

How  

Why 

Improve precision of vehicle-
to-route operational and 
energetical match 

Analyze telematics and battery state-
of-charge data per route to improve 
vehicle routing strategies and make 
use of heterogeneous fleets. 

Reduce energy consumption, 
optimize battery use, suggest eco-
driving behaviors, will extend the 
economic value of each vehicle. 

Extend vehicle capabilities 
by integrating charging 
services 

Include available charging points in 
the routing and scheduling plan, while 
reserving the charging points.  

Mitigate congestion and 
delay risks in transport with 
flexible charging reservation 
system. 

Update charging point (or loading 
bay) reservations based on estimated 
time of arrival based on real-time 
vehicle telematics. 

Benefit from lower prices and 
emissions of electricity  

Analyze historical data or receive real-
time updates to determine optimal 
charging schedule, and integrating in 
route and scheduling optimization 

Selecting an appropriate charging 
strategy extends daily driving range of 
the vehicle, while reducing range 
anxietyxxiv. 

Ensure charging availability by 
dynamically adjusting charging point 
or loading bay reservations with short 
time windows according to dynamic 
estimated time of arrivalsxxv. 

Exploit benefits of the prices of and 
availability of renewable electricity 
which vary during the dayxxvi.  

Note  that  the  prerequisite  for  the  integration  is  that  carriers  are  persuaded  to  share  data  or 
integrate the systems. Establishing trust and incorporating safeguards in contracts can mitigate 
these challenges. 

Streamlining digital integration as it develops 

Ongoing enhancements in technical communication protocols pose another obstacle, requiring 
alignment with evolving market and technology. In addressing these challenges, freight buyers 
play  a  pivotal  role.  They  must  advocate  for  interoperability  in  emerging  standards,  preventing 
issues like lock-in and compatibility. Moreover, emphasis on quality implementation is crucial to 
ensure practical effectiveness. Freight buyers can contribute by supporting carriers and solution 
providers in experimenting with digital solutions before widespread migration to new systems.  

24 

  
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

9  Optimizing carriers' charging strategies 

Companies face a dual opportunity in ensuring the success of their carriers' electrification efforts: 
infrastructure provision or facilitating their access to charging services. 

The  reliance  of  electric  vehicle  systems  on  charging  infrastructure  poses  challenges  in 
purchasing, installing, and accessing it, acting as a significant hurdle for fleets.xxvii Despite truck 
operators expected to manage their own infrastructure, freight buyers can enhance the appeal of 
electrification collaboration by actively providing support here.  

Types of charging strategy and infrastructure 

The charging strategy refers to the carrier's method of incorporating charging services into vehicle 
operations, typically characterized by the driver's activities, the vehicle's operating condition, and 
the charging locationxxviii. The main types of charging strategies, expected to be used in most truck 
operations, are described briefly below.  

Overnight (or downtime):

Opportunity fast:

Opportunity ultra-fast:

• How: 50-150 kW at depots or 
long-duration truck parking.
• Why: Default charging during 

the truck's idle period of 8 to 10 
hours daily, especially in single-
shift operations. This is not 
easily available to trucks used in 
multi-shift operations.

• How: 150 – 350 kW at 

destination locations (loading 
bays, temporary parking, 
depots).

• Why: Quick top-up during 

logistics activities, mandatory 
breaks, or between shift 
changes, crucial in long-haul 
operations.

• How: 750 kW – 3 MW at 

destination locations and truck 
break sites. Technology still in 
development.

• Why: Similar to opportunity fast 

but suited for larger battery 
vehicles with higher charging 
demand, particularly critical in 
long-haul operations.

Figure 12 Charging strategies, descriptions, and purposexxix  

Opportunities that make investment in charging infrastructure appealing 

Freight buyers could facilitate access to the above charging services in different ways. 
▪  Establishing  a  partnership  with  (semi-)  public  charging  service  operators  involves 
negotiating  rates  for  charging  services  before  the  actual  implementation  and  securing 
exclusive access for co-owned charging sites. 

▪  Providing charging services on their premises can include the installation of chargers at 
loading  bays  to  facilitate  opportunity  charging  and  the  sharing  of  charging  points  at  freight 
buyer-owned depots. 

▪  Exploring co-development or joint-financing of semi-public charging hubs entails freight 
buyers  and  carriers  collaborating  to  install  chargers  and  receiving  potentially  favorable 
financing terms from institutions based on the quality of their relationship. 

Supporting  carriers  in  establishing  charging  infrastructure  offers  advantages  like  securing  grid 
access early and avoiding higher costs associated with public charging. The investments which 
carry higher costs and risks to the company, could be introduced into cost-sharing terms or energy 
price indexing in carrier compensation contracts. In addition, freight buyers can exploit synergies 
with their Scope 2 emission reduction measures, such as securing renewable energy, if charging 
takes place on-site.  
Despite  the  benefits,  companies  must  navigate  this  support  mechanism  with  care.  Obtaining 
governmental  permission  to  sell  charging  services  and  building  approvals  from  facility  owners 
may add to the complexity. Implementing reservation systems for charging is essential for optimal 
infrastructure use. However, if chargers are installed at loading bays, it may complicate logistics 
loading bay scheduling optimization. 

25 

  
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

10  Support for vehicle acquisition 

Companies  providing  vehicle  acquisition  support  mitigate  financial  risks  and  expedite  market 
development, addressing a key obstacle in electrification efforts. 

Fleet  operators  are  primarily  concerned  about  the  profitability  and  affordability  of  providing  e-
trucking services. Buyers are focused on the long-term cost-efficiency of electric freight services, 
seeking  the  best  CO2  reduction  per  price  efficiency  and  affordability  relative  to  transportation 
needs. There is a significant opportunity for collaboration between carriers and buyers to mutually 
support each other as electrification gains traction. 

Understand the carrier’s vehicle acquisition model 

Despite  significant  improvements  in  the  value-intensity  of  e-trucks  (e.g.,  trucks  are  becoming 
better and cheaper) in recent years, with expectations for continued enhancement in the coming 
decade,  carriers  aiming  to  electrify  currently  encounter  challenging  financial  risks.  These  risks 
primarily  include  high  initial  capital  investment,  limited  availability  of  public  subsidiesxxx,  and 
uncertainties regarding total cost of ownership (TCO) and potential revenuexxxi.  
The  method  of  acquiring  vehicles  within  a  transportation  business  can  vary,  ranging  from 
purchases or leases of new or secondhand vehicles, and may rely on external financing or the 
use  of  internal  funds.  Large  operators  are  more  likely  than  small  and  medium  operators  to 
purchase or lease new vehicles and to depend on external financingxxxii, and would therefore be 
more likely to acquire electric freight vehicles as the market develops. 

Ways to support vehicle acquisition 

Depending on the circumstances and available resources, companies have the ability to assist 
carriers with vehicle  acquisition.  Figure 13 illustrates  several examples of how companies can 
offer  support,  such  as  facilitating  access  to  financing  or  fleet  leasing  services,  or  actively 
participating in vehicle ownership.  

Joint application for subsidies 
and grants:
• Shippers can submit joint applications 

on behalf of carriers and handle 
administrative tasks collectively.
• Why: This approach reduces the 

administrative burden for carriers and 
ensures clarity regarding the legal 
requirements for the applications.

Negotiating with fleet leasing 
services:

Serve as guarantor in vehicle 
financing:

• Shippers have the opportunity to 

leverage their financial strength to 
negotiate lower rates and more 
favorable terms with truck-as-a-service 
and leasing companies.

• Why: This strategy has the potential to 
enhance the carrier's profitability and 
mitigate risks during the transition 
phase.

• Shippers can leverage their financial 
strength to negotiate lower rates and 
more favorable terms with financial 
institutions.

• Why: This allows them to serve as 

guarantors in case the financial risk 
profile of carriers is not positive, 
thereby mitigating risk for financial 
services.

Leasing vehicles to carriers:
• Shippers could purchase and lease 
vehicles to carriers, enabling shared 
vehicle usage among multiple carriers 
to facilitate learning. 

• Why: This approach places almost all 
financial risk on the shipper, which is 
attractive to carriers. Enabling more 
carriers to field test the vehicles will 
accelerate the transition.

Guaranteeing buyback solution 
for old e-trucks:

• Including a clause in contract to 

guarantee that the shipper will facilitate 
a buyback at the end of the vehicle's 
life, in the event that the secondhand 
market does not develop as expected.
• Why: Including this clause will mitigate 
concerns about the resale value of the 
vehicles and the risk of ending up with 
stranded assets.

Figure 13 Vehicle acquisition support measures 
Freight  buyers  are  reminded  that  ownership  costs  and  risks  are  shared  between  them  and 
carriers, prompting a caution in selecting partners (Section  6) and ensuring explicit protections 
espoused in contracts (Section 7).  

26 

  
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Daimler  Truck’s  goal  to  electrify  delivery  to 
Wörth plant and deploy charging infrastructure 

Daimler Truck has set itself the ambitious goal of 100% electrification of delivery traffic to its 
largest truck plant by the end of 2026, to make a significant part of its direct supply chain CO2-
neutral. 
Together with logistics service providers and freight forwarders who supply the German Daimler 
Truck  plants  daily,  the  company  is  working  to  integrate  e-trucks  into  their  fleet.  The  core 
elements  of  the  approach  revolve  around  piloting  vehicles,  deploying  charging  infrastructure 
tied with the most fitting charging strategy for their logistics operations, and providing planning 
advice to their freight forwarders. 
Both  the  eActros  300  and  eActros  600  models  will  be  used  in  real-world  conditions.  In 
December  2023,  twelve  eActros  tractors  were  handed  over  to  forwarders  and  are  currently 
employed  in  transporting  goods  to  the  plants.  Starting  from  the  first  quarter  of  2024,  these 
vehicles will conduct  approximately  50  all-electric transports to German plants daily. Moving 
forward they aim to  build on the learnings  of the  pilots to electrify  all transport  within  a 200-
kilometer radius as an interim goal.  
The  most  challenging  aspect  of  the 
ambition  was 
to  deploy  charging 
infrastructure.  These  were  deployed  at 
the Wörth site and the German plants in 
Kassel,  Mannheim,  and  Gaggenau. 
Charging  columns,  including  megawatt 
charging  stations  for  high-performance 
battery  charging,  are  planned  at  key 
the 
points 
production plants.  
It is crucial to not lose valuable process 
time  for  additional  charging  so  that  the 
e-truck  can  be  used  as  efficiently  as  a 
diesel  truck.  Hence,  each  route  has  to 
be analyzed in detail to find the optimized 
combination of routes, charging stations, 
and time slots for delivery. This is only possible if the freight buyer, forwarder and, if necessary, 
further  involved  parties,  e.g.  suppliers,  work  together  in  partnership  and  at  eye  level.  The 
ambition is that the time during which the e-truck's cargo is unloaded will be used to recharge 
the vehicle's battery. In this way, the vehicle ideally does not have to schedule further downtime 
and can resume its route directly after parts delivery. 
To develop a targeted concept for zero-emission delivery logistics to  the Wörth  plant and to 
further  plants  in  Daimler  Truck’s  production  network  the  first  step  is  to  work  with  freight 
forwarders  to  analyze  their  regular  routes.  This  provides  information  on  travel  times  and 
distances between delivery locations, charging options, and individual truck ranges. They also 
receive  support  integrating  e-trucks  into  their  existing  fleets  and  in  realigning  their  logistics 
centers, including advice on setting up the appropriate in-house charging infrastructure. 
Realizing that a collaborative approach is required to reach their own sustainability goals, they 
have launched the Sustainable Logistics Consulting program. In this program, Daimler Truck 
will leverage the insights from the Wörth plant pilots to support other organizations to electrify 
their logistics processes. 

Figure 14 eActros charged at Wörth plant 

for  delivery 

traffic  near 

27 

  
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Conclusion  

28 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

11  Scaling the e-trucking industry together  

The  publication  outlines  a  carrier  engagement  strategy  to  accelerate  electrification  of  the 
shipper’s carrier network by addressing fundamental concerns that carriers have that hinder 
electrification.  
▪  Market uncertainty: Carriers hesitate due to concerns about long-term market stability and 

the evolving ecosystem. 

▪  Knowledge gaps: Operating e-trucks requires new skills and strategies, which carriers lack 

and need to learn. 

▪  Limited  resources:  Early-stage  experimentation  comes  with  financial  and  resource 

constraints that carriers struggle with. 

While some markets are slightly further along the transition than others, it is safe to say that the 
trucking industry around the world is merely at the early adopter stage of electrification. 
Any  practice  or  business  model  with  e-trucks  at  its  core  is  out  of  place  in  the  current  freight 
ecosystem.  Hence,  many  elements  that  previously  supported  the  ICE-based  trucking  industry 
need  to  be  revamped  or  replaced  to  support  e-truck  operations  instead.  This  includes  the 
transformation of market expectations, competence of all logistics actors, and business norms.  
The 3rd Party Electrification Framework (3PEF) offers a comprehensive approach to address 
electrification concerns within existing freight buyer-carrier relationships and help freight 
buyers navigate the transition at the early adopter stage. It emphasizes three main questions: 
aligning  the  vision  of  electrification,  designing  a  suitable  partnership  model,  and  providing 
operational support to carriers. The framework comprises eight types of actions that enhance a 
freight  buyer's  carrier  engagement  or  procurement  strategy  for  electrification.  It  is  essential  to 
consider that the actions are most effective when integrated into a cohesive system of behavior, 
rather than implemented piecemeal, but also that they are not necessarily part of a linear process. 
The elements mutually reinforce each other.  

Figure 15 Mutual reinforcement of each element in the framework. 

The  result  of  implementing  the  framework  stack  up.  Through  consistent  addressing  of  carrier 
needs, updating  procurement  policies, and fostering  learning initiatives, the freight buyer will 
gradually be identified as a leader in nurturing the e-trucking market, with effects extending 
beyond their own network. The leadership role effectively inspires other freight buyers to adopt 
similar ambitions and approaches, fostering collaboration and cooperation with their suppliers.  
Eventually, synergies between the electrification efforts of other freight buyers and large 
carriers  will  begin  to  emerge  and  organizations  will  recognize  opportunities  for 
collaboration  to  address  other  persistent  ecosystem  barriers.  Several  effective  collaborative 

29 

Building a Vision for ElectrificationCreating a Supportive Partnership ModelProviding Operational Support▪Internal electrification alignment▪Understanding carriers through dialogue▪Double-looplearning in electrification▪Attracting the right carriers▪Enhancing contracts for electrification▪Cooperating through digital integration▪Optimizing carriers' charging strategies▪Support for vehicle acquisition  
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

initiatives have already begun spurred by the commitment of freight decarbonization leaders to 
truck  electrification.  These  include  activities  like  demand  signaling,  development  of  shared 
charging infrastructure, joint development of instruments to finance the transition, support for zero 
emission trucking policies, and adoption of zero emission logistics procurement guidelines. These 
align with the strategy outlined in this publication and address these challenges from a different 
angle. 
This  will  drive  a  significant  acceleration  in  demand  for  e-trucking  services  across  diverse 
regions, establishing a robust yet continually innovating market for zero-emission logistics. Market 
growth will be fueled not only by societal and legislative pressures to decarbonize but also by the 
growing  availability  and  demand  of  these  services.  As  a  result,  the  majority  of  carriers  will 
transition away from fossil-fuel vehicles, marking a shift towards low-carbon solutions dominance 
and mitigating climate impact.  
In conclusion, the 3PEF framework goes beyond a simple set of guidelines; it acts as a catalyst 
for positive change across the entire e-trucking ecosystem. By fostering leadership, encouraging 
collaboration, and ultimately accelerating market demand, it paves the way for a more sustainable 
electrified future for all actors and stakeholders. 

30 

  
 
 
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

Notes 

and 

Change, 

Forecasting 

technological  change:  Empirical  evidence 
Social 

i Smart Freight Centre. 2024. Measuring and Reporting the Carbon Footprint of Electric Freight 
Vehicle Operations: Whitepaper. 
ii ICCT. 2023. A total cost of ownership comparison of truck decarbonization pathways in Europe. 
Working paper 2023-28 
iii Smart Freight Centre, Calstart, & RVO. 2023. Financing the transition to electric trucks: Framing 
paper for the start of a dialogue. Transforming Transportation 2023: Accelerating Toward Green 
and Inclusive Mobility. https://www.flexmail.eu/f-7dcc9769db7ff029  
iv ICCT. 2023. European heavy-duty vehicle market development quarterly: January-March 2023. 
v Allen, J., Piecyk, M., & Cao, M. 2023. Road Freight Transport SMEs: Trading, Operational and 
Decarbonisation Perspectives (ENG-TR.030). 
vi Elzinga, R., Janssen, M. J., Wesseling, J., Negro, S. O., & Hekkert, M. P. (2023).  Assessing 
mission-specific innovation systems: Towards an analytical framework. Environmental Innovation 
and Societal Transitions, 48, 100745. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2023.100745 
vii  Hekkert,  M.  P.,  &  Negro,  S.  O.  (2009).  Functions  of  innovation  systems  as  a  framework  to 
for  earlier  claims. 
understand  sustainable 
Technological 
584–594. 
76(4), 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2008.04.013 
viii  Melander,  L.,  Nyquist-Magnusson,  C.,  &  Wallström,  H.  (2022).  Drivers  for  and  barriers  to 
electric  freight  vehicle  adoption  in  Stockholm.  Transportation  Research  Part  D:  Transport  and 
Environment, 108, 103317. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2022.103317 
ix  Smart  Freight  Centre.  (2016).  Barriers  for  Carriers  to  adopt  fuel-saving  technologies  and 
measures. 
x  Tölke,  M.,  &  McKinnon,  A.  (2021).  Decarbonizing  the  operations  of  small  and  medium-sized 
road carriers in Europe. 
xi Jazairy, A., von Haartman, R., & Björklund, M. (2021). Unravelling collaboration mechanisms 
for  green  logistics:  The  perspectives  of  shippers  and  logistics  service  providers.  International 
Journal 
423–448. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-09-2019-0274 
xii Transporeon. (2022). Decarbonizing Freight 2022: Where shippers and carriers stand on the 
road to net zero. https://www.transporeon.com/en/reports/decarbonizing-freight-2022 
xiii For a comprehensive approach to incorporating sustainability into logistics procurement, refer 
to  the  "Procurement  Playbook  toward  Zero  Emissions  Logistics  Services,"  which  outlines  a 
systematic  approach  and  leverages  established  standards  for  both  outsourced  services  and 
across all transportation modes. Smart Freight Centre. 2024. "Procurement Playbook. Towards 
Zero Emissions Logistics Services". 
xiv  WBCSD.  2022.  “Incentives  for  Scope  3  Supply  Chain  Decarbonization:  Accelerating 
Implementation.” 
xv  Edmondson,  Amy.  1999.  “Psychological  Safety  and  Learning  Behavior  in  Work  Teams.” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 44 (2): 350–83.  
xvi  Jazairy,  Amer,  Robin  von  Haartman,  and  Maria  Björklund.  2021.  “Unravelling  Collaboration 
Mechanisms for Green Logistics: The Perspectives of Shippers and Logistics Service Providers.” 
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management 51 (4): 423–48.  
xvii Lewis, J. David, and Andrew Weigert. 1985. “Trust as a Social Reality.” Social Forces 63 (4): 
967–85. 
xviii IRU. 2023. “Driver Shortage Report 2023: Freight – Global: Executive Summary.”  

of  Physical  Distribution  & 

Logistics  Management, 

51(4), 

31 

  
 
 
 
Unlocking Your Carrier's Electrification Buy-in 

xix Mental models are defined as “deeply ingrained assumptions, generalizations, or images that 
influence how market actors understand the world and how they take action”. Storbacka, Kaj, and 
Suvi Nenonen. 2011. “Markets as Configurations.” European Journal of Marketing 45 (1/2): 241–
58.  
xx  Edmondson,  Amy.  1999.  “Psychological  Safety  and  Learning  Behavior  in  Work  Teams.” 
Administrative Science Quarterly 44 (2): 350–83. https://doi.org/10.2307/2666999  
xxi Argyris, Chris. (1977. “Double Loop Learning in Organizations”. In Harvard Business Review. 
https://hbr.org/1977/09/double-loop-learning-in-organizations. 
xxii  Cowan,  Robin,  and  Nicolas  Jonard.  2001.  “Knowledge  Creation,  Knowledge  Diffusion  and 
Network Structure.” In , 503:327–43. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-56472-7_20.  
xxiii WBCSD provides an overview of how decarbonization criteria in supplier selection fits in the 
broader procurement process (WBCSD 2020) 
xxiv  The  selection  of  charging  strategy  is  a  decision  taken  by  transport  operator  but  to  a  large 
extent,  enabled  by  the  shipper’s  transport  requirements.  See  Teoh,  T.  (2022).  Electric  vehicle 
charging strategies for Urban freight transport: Concept and typology. Transport Reviews, 42(2), 
Article 2. https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2021.1950233   
xxv Charging point reservations could use approaches in truck slot management. See Prakoso, E. 
F., Maknoon, Y., Pel, A., Tavasszy, L. A., & Vanga, R. (2022). A Predictive–Proactive Approach 
for  Slot  Management  of  a  Loading  Facility  With  Truck  ETA  Information.  Frontiers  in  Future 
Transportation, 3. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/ffutr.2022.815267 .  
xxvi These benefits are only available in regions, where energy providers implement dynamic retail 
tariffs, 
advance” 
(https://www.raponline.org/blog/flex-and-the-city-cities-need-dynamic-pricing-for-public-
charging/, Accessed 20.06.2023). 
xxvii ICCT. (2022b). Road freight decarbonization in Europe: Readiness of the European fleets for 
zero-emission trucking. 
xxviii Teoh, T. (2022). “Electric Vehicle Charging Strategies for Urban Freight Transport: Concept 
and Typology.” Transport Reviews 42 (2): 157–80.  
xxix ICCT. (2022a). Charging solutions for battery-electric trucks.; Teoh, T. (2022). “Electric Vehicle 
Charging Strategies for Urban Freight Transport: Concept and Typology.” Transport Reviews 42 
(2): 157–80. https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2021.1950233 . 
xxx  ACEA.  (2023).  “Electric  Commercial  Vehicles:  Tax  Benefits  and  Purchase  Incentives.” 
https://www.acea.auto/files/Electric_commercial_vehicles_Tax_benefits-
and_purchase_incentives_2023.pdf.  
xxxi  Smart  Freight  Centre,  Calstart,  &  RVO.  (2023).  Financing  the  transition  to  electric  trucks: 
Framing paper for the start of a dialogue. Transforming Transportation 2023: Accelerating Toward 
Green and Inclusive Mobility. https://www.flexmail.eu/f-7dcc9769db7ff029  
xxxii Allen, Julian, Maja Piecyk, and Mengqiu Cao. (2023). “Road Freight Transport SMEs: Trading, 
Operational and Decarbonisation Perspectives.” ENG-TR.030. 

communicated 

hourly 

prices 

e.g., 

day 

“in 

in 

a 

32 

  
 
 
Join our journey towards 
efficient and zero-emission 
global freight and logistics 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
